Ralph T. H. GriffithRamayan of ValmikiRamayan of Valmiki


Sacred Texts  Hinduism  
RÁMÁYAN OF VÁLMÍKI
RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH, M. A.,
[1870-1874]
Contents    Start Reading 
This is the first complete public domain translation of 
the Ramayana to be placed online. The Ramayana is one of the two epic Hindu poems, the other being the Mahabharata. The Ramayana describes a love story between Rama, an ancient King, and Sita, who is captured by Ravan, the King of Ceylon. Rama lays siege to Ceylon and wins back Sita. The parallels to the 
Iliad are obvious, but the details are very different.
This verse translation by Griffith, whose translations of the Rig Veda and 
the Sama Veda are also available at sacred-texts, was scanned in 2000 
from an original copy, which had very poor typesetting. Due to the difficulty of converting this 600 page text to etext, the project was put on hold for several years until OCR technology matured. Finally in 2003, the text was OCR-ed and proofed at Distributed Proofing. However, 

despite best efforts, there are several places in this text where the 
proofing was difficult or impossible. These are indicated by asterisks or (illegible). We are in the process of cleaning up these issues and hope to have a definitive version of this text at some point. In the meantime we hope you enjoy this epic, which is one of the most popular tales of Indian mythology.
Title Page
Title Page
Invocation
Invocation
BOOK I
Book I
Canto I: Nárad. 
Canto II: Brahmá's Visit
Canto III.: The Argument.
Canto IV.: The Rhapsodists.
Canto V.: Ayodhyá
Canto VI.: The King.
Canto VII.: The Ministers.
Canto VIII.: Sumantra's Speech.

Canto IX.: Rishyas'ring.
Canto X.: Rishyas'ring Invited.
Canto XI: The Sacrifice Decreed.
Canto XII.: The Sacrifice Begun.
Canto XIII.: The Sacrifice Finished.
Canto XIV.: Rávan Doomed.
Canto XV.: The Nectar.
Canto XVI.: The Vánars.
Canto XVII.: Rishyas'ring's Return.
Canto XVIII.: Rishyas'ring's Departure.
Canto XIX.: The Birth of The Princes.
Canto XX.: Vis'vámitra's Visit.
Canto XXI.: Vis'vámitra's Speech.
Canto XXII.: Das'aratha's Speech.
Canto XXIII.: Vas'ishtha's Speech.
Canto XXIV.: The Spells.
Canto XXV.: The Hermitage of Love.
Canto XXVI.: The Forest of Tádaká.
Canto XXVII.: The Birth of Tádaká.
Canto XXVIII.: The Death of Tádaká
Canto XXIX. : The Celestial Arms.
Canto XXX.: The Mysterious Powers.
Canto XXXI: The Perfect Hermitage.
Canto XXXII.: Vis'vámitra's Sacrifice.
Canto XXXIII.: The Sone.
Canto XXXIV.: Brahmadatta.

Canto XXXV: Visvámitra's Lineage.
Canto XXXVI.: The Birth of Gangá.
Canto XXXIX.: The Sons of Sagar.
Canto XL.: The Cleaving of The Earth.
Canto XLI.: Kapil.
Canto XLII.: Sagar's Sacrifice.
Canto XLIII.: Bhagirath.
Canto XLIV.: The Descent of Gangà.
Canto XLV.: The Quest of The Amrit.
Canto XLVI.: Diti's Hope.
Canto XLVII.: Sumatí.
Canto XLVIII.: Indra And Ahalyá
Canto XLIX.: Ahalyá Freed.
Canto L.: Janak.
Canto LI.: Vis'vámitra.
Canto LII.: Vas'ishtha's Feast.
Canto LIII.: Vis'vàmitra's Request.
Canto LIV.: The Battle.
Canto LV.: The Hermitage Burnt.
Canto LVI.: Vis'vámitra's Vow.
Canto LVII.: Tris'anku.
Canto LVIII.: Tris'anku Cursed.
Canto LIX.: The Sons of Vas'ishtha.
Canto LX.: Tris'anku's Ascension.
Canto LXI: S'unahs'epha.
Canto LXII.: Ambaresha's Sacrifice.

Canto LXIII.: Menaká.
Canto LXIV.: Rambhá.
Canto LXV.: Vis'vámitra's Triumph
Canto LXVI.: Janak's Speech.
Canto LXVII.: The Breaking of The Bow.
Canto LXVIII.: The Envoys' Speech.
Canto LXIX.: Das'aratha's Visit.
Canto LXX.: The Maidens Sought.
Canto LXXI.: Janak's Pedigree.
Canto LXXII.: The Gift of Kine.
Canto LXXIII.: The Nuptials.
Canto LXXIV.: Ráma With The Axe.
Canto LXXV.: The Parle.
Canto LXXVI.: Debarred From Heaven.
Canto LXXVII.: Bharat's Departure.
Book II
Book II
Canto I.: The Heir Apparent.
Canto II.: The People's Speech.
Canto III.: Das'aratha's Precepts.
Canto IV.: Ráma Summoned.
Canto V.: Ráma's Fast.
Canto VI.: The City Decorated.
Canto VII.: Manthará's Lament.

Canto VIII: Manthará's Speech.
Canto IX.: The Plot.
Canto X.: Das'aratha's Speech.
Canto XI.: The Queen's Demand.
Canto XII.: Dasaratha's Lament.
Canto XIII.: Das'aratha's Distress.
Canto XIV.: Ráma Summoned.
Canto XV.: The Preparations.
Canto XVI.: Ráma Summoned.
Canto XVII.: Ráma's Approach.
Canto XVIII.: The Sentence.
Canto XIX.: Ráma's Promise.
Canto XX.: Kaus'alyá's Lament.
Canto XXI.: Kaus'alyá Calmed.
Canto XXII.: Lakshman Calmed.
Canto XXIII.: Lakshman's Anger.
Canto XXIV.: Kaus'alyá Calmed.
Canto XXV.: Kaus'alya's Blessing.
Canto XXVI.: Alone With Sitá
Canto XXVII.: Sítá's Speech.
Canto XXVIII.: The Dangers of The Wood.
Canto XXIX.: Sítá's Appeal.
Canto XXX.: The Triumph of Love.
Canto XXXI.: Lakshman's Prayer.
Canto XXXII.: The Gift of The Treasures.
Canto XXXIII.: The People's Lament.

Canto XXXIV.: Ráma In The Palace.
Canto XXXV.: Kaikeyí Reproached.
Canto XXXVI.: Siddhárth's Speech.
Canto XXXVII.: The Coats of Bark.
Canto XXXVIII.: Care For Kaus'alyá
Canto XXXIX.: Counsel To Sítá.
Canto XL.: Ráma's Departure.
Canto XLI.: The Citizens' Lament.
Canto XLII.: Das'aratha's Lament.
Canto XLIII.: Kaus'alyá's Lament.
Canto XLIV.: Sumitra's Speech.
Canto XLV.: The Tamasá.
Canto XLVI.: The Halt.
Canto XLVII.: The Citizens' Return.
Canto XLVIII.: The Women's Lament.
Canto XLIX.: The Crossing of The Rivers.
Canto L.: The Halt Under The Ingudí.
Canto LI.: Lakshman's Lament.
Canto LII.: The Crossing of Gangá.
Canto LIII.: Ráma's Lament.
Canto LIV.: Bharadvája's Hermitage.
Canto LV.: The Passage of Yamuná.
Canto LVI.: Chitrakuta.
Canto LVII.: Sumantra's Return.
Canto LVIII.: Ráma's Message.
Canto LIX: Das'aratha's Lament.

Canto LX.: Kaus'alyá Consoled.
Canto LXI.: Kauslaya's Lament.
Canto LXII.: Das'aratha Consoled.
Canto LXIII.: The Hermit's Son.
Canto LXIV.: Das'aratha's Death.
Canto LXV.: The Women's Lament.
Canto LXVI.: The Embalming.
Canto LXVII.: The Praise of Kings.
Canto LXVIII.: The Envoys.
Canto LXIX.: Bharat's Dream.
Canto LXX.: Bharat's Departure.
Canto LXXI.: Bharat's Return.
Canto LXXII.: Bharat's Inquiry.
Canto LXXIII.: Kaikeyí Reproached.
Canto LXXIV.: Bharat's Lamest.
Canto LXXV.: The Abjuration.
Canto LXXVI.: The Funeral
Canto LXXVII.: The Gathering of The Ashes.
Canto LXXVIII.: Manthará Punished.
Canto LXXIX.: Bharat's Commands.
Canto LXXX.: The Way Prepared.
Canto LXXXI.: The Assembly.
Canto LXXXII.: The Departure.
Canto LXXXIII.: The Journey Begun.
Canto LXXXIV.: Guha's Anger.
Canto LXXXV.: Guha And Bharat.

Canto LXXXVI.: Guha's Speech.
Canto LXXXVII.: Guha's Story.
Canto LXXXVIII.: The Ingudí Tree.
Canto LXXXIX.: The Passage of Gangá.
Canto XC.: The Hermitage.
Canto XCI.: Bharadvája's Feast.
Canto XCII.: Bharat's Farewell.
Canto XCIII.: Chitrakúta In Sight.
Canto XCIV.: Chitrakúta.
Canto XCV.: Mandákiní.
Canto XCVI. : The Magic Shaft.
Canto XCVII.: Lakshman's Anger.
Canto XCVIII: Lakshman Calmed.
Canto XCIX.: Bharat's Approach.
Canto C.: The Meeting.
Canto CI.: Bharat Questioned.
Canto CII.: Bharat's Tidings.
Canto CIII.: The Funeral Libation.
Canto CIV.: The Meeting With The Queens.
Canto CV.: Rama's Speech.
Canto CVI.: Bharat's Speech.
Canto CVII.: Ráma's Speech.
Canto CVIII.: Jáváli's Speech.
Canto CIX.: The Praises of Truth.
Canto CX.: The Sons of Ikshva'ku.
Canto CXI.: Counsel To Bharat.

Canto CXII.: The Sandals.
Canto CXIII.: Bharat's Beturn.
Canto CXIV.: Bharat's Departure.
Canto CXV.: Nandigrám. 
Canto CXVI.: The Hermit's Speech.
Canto CXVII.: Anasúyá.
Canto CXVIII.: Anasúyá's Gifts.
Canto CXIX.: The Forest.
BOOK III
Book III
Canto I.: The Hermitage.
Canto II.: Virádha.
Canto III.: Virádha Attacked.
Canto IV.: Virádha's Death.
Canto V.: S'arabhanga.
Canto VI.: Ráma's Promise.
Canto VII.: Sutíkshna.
Canto VIII.: The Hermitage.
Canto IX.: Sita's Speech.
Canto X.: Ráma's Reply.
Canto XI.: Agastya.
Canto XII.: The Heavenly Bow.
Canto XIII.: Agastya's Counsel.
Canto XIV.: Jatáyus.

Canto XV.: Panchavatt.
Canto XVI.: Winter.
Canto XVII.: S'u'panakha'
Canto XVIII.: The Mutilation.
Canto XIX.: The Rousing of Khara.
Canto XX.: The Giants' Death.
Canto XXI.: The Rousing of Khara.
Canto XXII: Khara's Wrath.
Canto XXIII.: The Omens.
Canto XXIV.: The Host In Sight.
Canto XXV.: The Battle.
Canto XXVI.: Dúshan's Death.
Canto XXVII.: The Death of Tris'iras.
Canto XXVIII.: Khara Dismounted.
Canto XXIX.: Khara's Defeat.
Canto XXX.: Khara's Death.
Canto XXXI.: Rávan
Canto XXXII.: Rávan Roused.
Canto XXXIII.: Súrpanakhá's Speech.
Canto XXXIV.: Sûrpanakhá's Speech.
Canto XXXV.: Rávan's Journey.
Canto XXXVI.: Rávan's Speech.
Canto XXXVII.: Márícha's Speech.
Canto XXXVIII.: Márícha's Speech.
Canto XXXIX.: Márícha's Speech.
Canto XL.: Rávan's Speech.

Canto XLI.: Márícha's Reply.
Canto XLII.: Márícha Transformed.
Canto XLIII.: The Wondrous Deer.
Canto XLIV: Artcha's Death
Canto XLV.: Lakshman's Departure.
Canto XLVI.: The Guest.
Canto XLVII: Rávan's Wooing.
Canto XLVIII: Rávan's Speech.
Canto XLIX.: The Rape of Sitá.
Canto L.: Jatáyus.
Canto LI.: The Combat.
Canto LII.: Rávan's Flight.
Canto LIII.: Sitá's Threats.
Canto LIV.: Lanká.
Canto LV.: Sítá In Prison.
Canto LVI.: Sítá's Disdain.
Canto LVII.: Sítá Comforted.
Canto LVIII.: The Brothers' Meeting.
Canto LIX.: Ráma's Return.
Canto LX.: Lakshman Reproved.
Canto LXI.: Ráma's Lament.
Canto LXII.: Ráma's Lament.
Canto LXIII.: Ráma's Lament.
Canto LXIV.: Rama's Lament.
Canto LXV.: Rama's Wrath.
Canto LXVI.: Lakshman's Speech.

Canto LXVII.: Ráma Appeased.
Canto LXVIII.: Jatáyus.
Canto LXIX.: The Death of Jatáyus.
Canto LXX.: Kabandha.
Canto LXXI.: Kabandha's Speech.
Canto LXXII.: Kabandha's Tale.
Canto LXXIII.: Kabandha's Counsel.
Canto LXXIV.: Kabandha's Death.
Canto LXXV.: Savari
Canto LXXVI.: Pampá.
BOOK IV
Book IV
Canto I.: Ráma's Lament.
Canto II.: Sugríva's Alarm.
Canto IV: Lakshman's Reply.
Canto V.: The League.
Canto VI.: The Tokens.
Canto VII.: Ráma Consoled.
Canto VIII.: Ráma's Promise.
Canto IX.: Sugríva's Story. 
Canto X.: Sugríva's Story.
Canto XI.: Dundubhi.
Canto XII.: The Palm Trees.
Canto XIII.: The Return To Kishkindhá.

Canto XIV.: The Challenge.
Canto XV.: Tará.
Canto XVI.: The Fall of Báli.
Canto XVII.: Báli's Speech.
Canto XVIII.: Ráma's Reply.
Canto XIX.: Tárá's Grief.
Canto XX.: Tárá's Lament.
Canto XXI.: Hanumán's Speech.
Canto XXII.: Báli Dead.
Canto XXIII.: Tárá's Lament.
Canto XXIV.: Sugríva's Lament.
Canto XXV.: Ráma's Speech.
Canto XXVI.: The Coronation.
Canto XXVII.: Ráma On The Hill.
Canto XXVIII.: The Rains.
Canto XXIX.: Hanumán's Counsel.
Canto XXX.: Ráma's Lament.
Canto XXXI.: The Envoy.
Canto XXXII.: Hanuman's Counsel.
Canto XXXIII.: Lakshman's Entry.
Canto XXXIV.: Lakshman's Speech
Canto XXXV.: Tárá's Speech.
Canto XXXVI.: Sugríva's Speech.
Canto XXXVII.: The Gathering.
Canto XXXVIII.: Sugríva's Departure.
Canto XXXIX.: The Vánar Host.

Canto XL.: The Army of The East.
Canto XLI.: The Army of The South.
Canto XLII.: The Army of The West.
Canto XLIII.: The Army of The North.
Canto XLIV.: The Ring.
Canto XLV.: The Departure.
Canto XLVI.: Sugríva's.
Canto XLVII.: The Return.
Canto XLVIII.: The Asur's Death.
Canto XLIX.: Angad's Speech.
Canto L.: The Enchanted Cave.
Canto LI.: Svayamprabhá
Canto LII.: The Exit.
Canto LIII.: Angad's Counsel.
Canto LIV.: Hanumán's Speech.
Canto LVI: 
Canto LV.: Angad's Reply
Canto LVI.: Sampáti.
Canto LVII.: Angad's Speech.
Canto LVIII: Tidings of Sitá.
Canto LIX.: Sampati's Story.
Canto LX.: Sampáti's Story
Canto LXI.: Sampáti's Story.
Canto LXII.: Sampáti's Story.
Canto LXIII.: Sampáti's Story.
Canto LXIV.: The Sea.

Canto LXV.: The Council.
Canto LXVI.: Hanumán.
Canto LXVII.: Hanuman's Speech.
BOOK V
Book V
Canto I.: Hanumán's Leap.
Canto II.: Lanká.
Canto III.: The Guardian Goddess.
Canto IV.: Within The City.
Canto VI. : The Court.
Canto VII.: Ravan's Palace.
Canto VIII.: The Enchanted Car.
Canto IX.: The Ladies' Bower.
Canto X.: Rávan Asleep.
Canto XI.: The Banquet Hall.
Canto XII.: The Search Renewed.
Canto XIII.: Despair And Hope.
Canto XIV.: The As'oka Grove.
Canto XV.: Sítá.
Canto XVI.: Hanumán's Lament.
Canto XVII.: Sítá's Guard.
Canto XVIII.: Rávan.
Canto XIX.: Síta's Fear.
Canto XX.: Rávan's Wooing.

Canto XXI.: Sita's Scorn.
Canto XXII.: Rávan's Threat.
Canto XXIII.: The Demons' Threats
Canto XXIV.: Sítá's Reply.
Canto XXV.: Sítá's Lament.
Canto XXVI.: Sitá's Lament
Canto XXVII.: Trijatá's Dream.
Canto XXX.: Hanumán's Deliberation.
Canto XXXI.: Hanumán's Speech.
Canto XXXII.: Sítá's Doubt.
Canto XXXIII.: The Colloquy.
Canto XXXIV.: Hanumán's Speech.
Canto XXXV.: Hanuman's Speech.
Canto XXXVI.: Ráma's Ring.
Canto XXXVII.: Sítá's Speech.
Canto XXXVIII.: Sitá's Gem.
Canto XLI.: The Ruin of The Grove.
Canto XLII.: The Giants Roused.
Canto XLIII.: The Ruin of The Temple.
Canto XLIV.: Jambumáli's Death.
Canto XLV.: The Seven Defeated.
Canto XLVI.: The Captains.
Canto XLVII.: The Death of Aksha.
Canto XLVIIL: Hanumán Captured.
Canto XLIX.: Rávan.
Canto L.: Prahasta's Questions.

Canto LI.: Hanumán's Reply.
Canto LII.: Vibhíshan's Speech.
Canto LIII.: The Punishment.
Canto LIV.: The Burning of Lanká.
Canto LV.: Fear For Sítá.
Canto LVI: Mount Arishta.
Canto LVII.: Hanúmán's Return.
Canto LXI.: The Feast of Honey.
Canto LXV. : The Tidings.
Canto LXVI.: Ráma's Speech.
BOOK VI
Book VI
Canto I.: Ráma's Speech.
Canto II.: Sugríva's Speech.
Canto III.: Lanká.
Canto IV.: The March.
Canto V.: Ráma's Lament.
Canto VI.: Rávan's Speech.
Canto VII.: Rávan Encouraged.
Canto VIII.: Prahasta's Speech.
Canto IX.: Vibhíshan's Counsel.
Canto X.: Vibhíshan's Counsel.
Canto XI.: The Summons.
Canto XII.: Ravan's Speech.

Canto XIII.: Rávan's Speech.
Canto XIV.: Vibhíshan's Speech.
Canto XV.: Indrajit's Speech.
Canto XVI.: Rávan's Speech.
Canto XVII.: Vibhíshan's Flight.
Canto XVIII.: Ráma's Speech.
Canto XIX.: Vibhíshan's Counsel.
Canto XX.: The Spies.
Canto XXI.: Ocean Threatened.
Canto XXII.: 
Canto XXIII.: The Omens.
Canto XXIV.: The Spy's Return.
Canto XXV.: Rávan's Spies.
Canto XXVI.: The Vánar Chiefs.
Canto XXVII.: The Vánar Chiefs.
Canto XXVIII.: The Chieftains.
Canto XXIX.: S'árdúla Captured.
Canto XXX.: Sárdúla's Speech.
Canto XXXI.: The Magic Head.
Canto XXXII.: Sitá's Lament.
Canto XXXIII.: Saramá.
Canto XXXIV.: Saramá's Tidings.
Canto XXXV.: Malyaván's Speech.
Canto XXXVI.: Rávan's Reply.
Canto XXXVII.: Preparations.
Canto XXXVIII.: The Ascent of Suvela.

Canto XXXIX.: Lanká.
Canto XL.: Rávan Attacked.
Canto XLI.: Ráma's Envoy.
Canto XLII.: The Sally.
Canto XLIII.: The Single Combats.
Canto XLIV.: The Night.
Canto XLV.: Indrajit's Victory.
Canto XLVI.: Indrajit's Triumph.
Canto XLVII.: Sitá.
Canto XLVIII.: Sitá's Lament.
Canto XLIX.: Ráma's Lament
Canto L.: The Broken Spell.
Canto LI.: Dhúmráksha's Sally.
Canto LII.: Dhúmráksha's Death.
Canto LIII.: Vajradanshtra's Sally.
Canto LIV.: Vajradanshtra's Death.
Canto LIX.: Rávans Sally.
Canto LX.: Kumbhakarna Roused.
Canto LX.: Kumbhakarn'a Roused.
Canto LXI.: The Vánars' Alarm.
Canto LXII: Rávan's Request
Canto LXIII.: Kumbhakabna's Boast.
Canto LXIV.: Mahodar's Speech.
Canto LXV.: Khumbhakarna's Speech.
Canto LXVI.: Kombhakarna's Sally.
Canto LXVII.: Kumbhakarna's Death.

Canto LXVIII.: Rávan's Lament.
Canto LXIX.: Narántak's Death.
Canto LXX.: The Death of Tris'iras.
Canto LXXI.: Atikáya's Death.
Canto LXXII.: Rávan's Speech.
Canto LXXIII.: Indrajit's Victory.
Canto LXXIV.: The Medicinal Herbs.
Canto LXXV.: The Night Attack.
Canto XCIII.: Rávan's Lament.
Canto XCVI.: Rávan's Sally.
Canto C.: Ravan In The Field.
Canto CI.: Lakshman's Fall.
Canto CII.: Lakshman Healed.
Canto CIII.: Indra's Car.
Canto CVI.: Glory To The Sun.
Canto CVIII.: The Battle.
Canto CIX.: The Battle.
Canto CX.: Rávan's Death.
Canto CXI.: Vibhíshan's Lament.
Canto CXII.: The Rákshas Dames.
Canto CXIII.: Mandodarí's Lament.
Canto CXIV: Vibhíshan Consecrated.
Canto CXV.: Sitá's Joy.
Canto CXVI.: The Meeting.
Canto CXVII.: Sítá's Disgrace.
Canto CXVIII.: Sítá's Reply.

Canto CXIX.: Glory To Vishnu.
Canto CXX.: Sítá Restored.
Canto CXXI.: Das'aratha.
Canto CXXII.: Indra's Boon.
Canto CXXIII.: The Magic Car.
Canto CXXIV.: The Departure.
Canto CXXV.: The Return.
Canto CXXVI.: Bharat Consoled.
Canto CXXVII.: Ráma's Message.
Canto CXXVIII.: Hanumán's Story.
Canto CXXIX.: The Meeting With Bharat.
Canto CXXX.: The Consecration.
APPENDICES
Appendices
Index of Principal Names
Errata

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Next  
THE
RÁMÁYAN OF VÁLMÍKI
Translated into English Verse
BY
RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH, M. A.,
[(Ralph Thomas Hotchkin Griffith), b. 1826 d. 1906]
PRINCIPAL OF THE BENARES COLLEGE
London: Trübner & Co.
Benares: E. J. Lazarus and Co.
[1870-1874]
Scanned at sacred-texts.com by John B. Hare. OCRed and 
Proofed at Distributed Proofing, Juliet Sutherland, Project 
Manager. Post-processing, computer programming, and 
additional proofreading by John B. Hare at sacred-texts.com. 
This text is in the public domain. These files may be used for 
any non-commercial purpose provided this notice of 

attribution is left intact.
Next: Invocation

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
p. 1
INVOCATION. 1
Praise to Válmíki, 2 bird of charming song, 3
   Who mounts on Poesy's sublimest spray,
And sweetly sings with accent clear and strong   Ráma, aye Ráma, in his deathless lay.
Where breathes the man can listen to the strain
   That flows in music from Válmíki's tongue,Nor feel his feet the path of bliss attain   When Ráma's glory by the saint is sung!
The stream Rámáyan leaves its sacred fount
   The whole wide world from sin and stain to free. 
1b
The Prince of Hermits is the parent mount,   The lordly Ráma is the darling sea.
Glory to him whose fame is ever bright!
   Glory to him, Prachetas'  
2b holy son!
Whose pure lips quaff with ever new delight   The nectar-sea of deeds by Ráma done.

Hail, arch-ascetic, pious, good, and kind!
   Hail, Saint Válmíki, lord of every lore!Hail, holy Hermit, calm and pure of mind!   Hail, First of Bards, Válmíki, hail once more!
Footnotes
1:1 The MSS. vary very considerably in these stanzas of 
invocation: many lines are generally prefixed in which 
not only the poet, but those who play the chief parts in the poem are panegyrized. It is self-apparent that they are not by the author of the Rámáyan himself.
1:2 'Válmíki was the son of Varuna, the regent of the 
waters, one of whose names is Prachetas. According to 
the Adhyátmá Rámáyana, the sage, although a Bráhman by birth, associated with foresters and robbers. Attacking on one occasion the seven Rishis, they expostulated with him successfully, and taught him the mantra of Ráma reversed, or Mará, Mará, in the inaudible repetition of which he remained immovable for thousands of years, so that when the sages returned to the same spot they found him still there, converted into a valmik or ant-hill, by the nests of the termites, whence his name of Válmíki.' 

WILSON. Specimens of the Hindu Theatre, Vol. I. p. 
313. 
'Válmíki is said to have lived a solitary life in the 
woods: he is called both a muni and a rishi. The former word properly signifies an anchorite or hermit; the latter has reference chiefly to wisdom. The two words are frequently used promiscuously, and may both be rendered by the Latin cates in its earliest meaning of seer: Válmíki was both poet and seer, as he is said to have sung the exploits of Ráma by the aid of divining insight rather than of knowledge naturally acquired.' SCHLEGEL.
1:3 Literally, Kokila, the Koil, or Indian Cuckoo. 
Schlegel translates 'luscinium.'
Next: Book I

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
BOOK I.  3b
Next: Canto I: Nárad. 

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO I: NÁRAD.  4b
*********
OM.  5b
   To sainted Nárad, prince of those
Whose lore in words of wisdom flows.Whose constant care and chief delightWere Scripture and ascetic rite,The good Válmíki, first and best
p. 2
Of hermit saints, these words addressed: 1
'In all this world, I pray thee, whoIs virtuous, heroic, true?Firm in his vows, of grateful mind,To every creature good and kind?Bounteous, and holy, just, and wise,Alone most fair to all men's eyes?Devoid of envy, firm, and sage,Whose tranquil soul ne'er yields to rage?Whom, when his warrior wrath is high,Do Gods embattled fear and fly?

Whose noble might and gentle skill
The triple world can guard from ill?Who is the best of princes, heWho loves his people's good to see?The store of bliss, the living mineWhere brightest joys and virtues shine?Queen Fortune's  
2 best and dearest friend,
Whose steps her choicest gifts attend?Who may with Sun and Moon compare,With Indra,  
3 Vishnu,  4 Fire, and Air?
Grant, Saint divine,  5 the boon I ask,
For thee, I ween, an easy task,To whom the power is given to knowIf such a man breathe here below.'
Then Nárad, clear before whose eye
The present, past, and future lie,  
1b
Made ready answer: 'Hermit, whereAre graces found so high and rare?Yet listen, and my tongue shall tellIn whom alone these virtues dwell.From old Ikshváku's  
2b line he came,
Known to the world by Ráma's name:With soul subdued, a chief of might,In Scripture versed, in glory bright,His steps in virtue's paths are bent,Obedient, pure, and eloquent.In each emprise he wins success,And dying foes his power confess.

Tall and broad-shouldered, strong of limb,
Fortune has set her mark on him.Graced with a conch-shell's triple line,His threat displays the auspicious sign. 
3b
p. 3
High destiny is clear impressedOn massive jaw and ample chest,His mighty shafts he truly aims,And foemen in the battle tames.Deep in the muscle, scarcely shown,Embedded lies his collar-bone.His lordly steps are firm and free,His strong arms reach below his knee; 
1
All fairest graces join to deckHis head, his brow, his stately neck,And limbs in fair proportion set:The manliest form e'er fashioned yet.Graced with each high imperial mark,His skin is soft and lustrous dark.Large are his eyes that sweetly shineWith majesty almost divine.His plighted word he ne'er forgets;On erring sense a watch he sets.By nature wise, his teacher's skillHas trained him to subdue his will.Good, resolute and pure, and strong,He guards mankind from scathe and wrong,

And lends his aid, and ne'er in vain,
The cause of justice to maintain.Well has he studied o'er and o'erThe Vedas 
2 and their kindred lore.
Well skilled is he the bow to draw, 1b
Well trained in arts and versed in law;High-souled and meet for happy fate,Most tender and compassionate;The noblest of all lordly givers,Whom good men follow, as the riversFollow the King of Floods, the sea:So liberal, so just is he.The joy of Queen Kaus'alyá's 
2b heart,
In every virtue he has part:Firm as Himálaya's 
3b snowy steep,
Unfathomed like the mighty deep:The peer of Vishnu's power and might,And lovely as the Lord of Night; 
4b
Patient as Earth, but, roused to ire,Fierce as the world-destroying fire;In bounty like the Lord of Gold, 
5b
And Justice self ia human mould.
With him, his best and eldest son,
By all his princely virtues wonKing Das'aratha 
6b willed to share
His kingdom as the Regent Heir.

But when Kaikeyí, youngest queen,
With eyes of envious hate had seenThe solemn pomp and regal statePrepared the prince to consecrate,She bade the hapless king bestowTwo gifts he promised long ago,That Ráma to the woods should flee,And that her child the heir should be.
By chains of duty firmly tied,
Thw wretched king perforce complied.
p. 4
Ráma, to please Kaikeyí wentObedient forth to banishment.Then Lakshman's truth was nobly shown,Then were his love and courage known,When for his brother's sake he daredAll perils, and his exile shared.And Sítá, Ráma's darling wife,Loved even as he loved his life,Whom happy marks combined to bless,A miracle of loveliness,Of Janak's royal lineage sprung,Most excellent of women, clungTo her dear lord, like RohiníRejoicing with the Moon to be.  
1
The King and people, sad of mood,

The hero's car awhile pursued.
But when Prince Ráma lighted downAt S'riugavera's pleasant town,Where Gangá's holy waters flow,He bade his driver turn and go.Guha, Nishádas' king, he met,And on the farther bank was set.Then on from wood to wood they strayed,O'er many a stream, through constant shade,As Bharadvája bade them, tillThey came to Chitrakúta's hill.And Ráma there, with Lakshman's aid,A pleasant little cottage made,And spent his days with Sítá, dressed
In coat of bark and deerskin vest.  
1b
And Chitrakuta grew to be
As bright with those illustrious threeAn Meru's  
2b sacred peaks that shine
With glory, when the Gods reclineBeneath them: Siva's  
3b self between
The Lord of Gold and Beauty's Queen.
The aged king for Rama pined,
And for the skies the earth resigned,Bharat, his son, refused to reign,Though urged by all the twice-born  
4b train.
Forth to the woods he fared to meetHia brother, fell before his feet,

And cried, 'Thy claim all men allow:
O come, our lord and king be thou.'
But Rama nobly chose to beObservant of his sire's decree.He placed his sandals  
5b in his hand
A pledge that he would rule the land:And bade his brother turn again.Then Bharat. finding prayer was vain,The sandals took and went away;Nor in Ayodhyá would he stay.But turned to Nandigráma, whereHe ruled the realm with watchful care,Still longing eagerly to learnTidings of Ráma's safe return.
Then lest the people should repeat
Their visit to his calm retreat,Away from Chitrakúta's hillFared Ráma ever onward till
p. 5
Beneath the shady trees he stoodOf Dandaká's primeval wood,Virádha, giant fiend, he slew,And then Agastya's friendship knew.Counselled by him he gained the swordAnd bow of Indra, heavenly lord:A pair of quivers too, that bore

Of arrows an exhaustless store.
While there he dwelt in greenwood shadeThe trembling hermits sought his aid,And bade him with his sword and bowDestroy the fiends who worked them woe:To come like Indra strong and brave,A guardian God to help and save.And Ráma's falchion left its traceDeep cut on Súrpanakhá's face:A hideous giantess who cameBurning for him with lawless flame.Their sister's cries the giants heard.And vengeance in each bosom stirred:The monster of the triple head.And Dúshan to the contest sped.But they and myriad fiends besideBeneath the might of Ráma died.
When Rávan, dreaded warrior, knew
The slaughter of his giant crew:Rávan, the king, whose name of fearEarth, hell, and heaven all shook to hear:He bade the fiend Márícha aidThe vengeful plot his fury laid.In vain the wise Márícha triedTo turn him from his course aside:Not Rávan's self, he said, might hopeWith Ráma and his strength to cope.Impelled by fate and blind with rage

He came to Ráma's hermitage.
There, by Márícha's magic art,He wiled the princely youths apart,The vulture 
1 slew, and bore away
The wife of Ráma as his prey.The son of Raghu 
2 came and found
Jatáyu slain upon the ground.He rushed within his leafy cot;He sought his wife, but found her not.Then, then the hero's senses failed;In mad despair he wept and wailed,Upon the pile that bird he laid,And still in quest of Sitá strayed.A hideous giant then he saw,Kabandha named, a shape of awe.
The monstrous fiend he smote and slew,
And in the flame the body threw;When straight from out the funeral flameIn lovely form Kabandha came,And bade him seek in his distressA wise and holy hermitess.By counsel of this saintly dameTo Pampá's pleasant flood he came,And there the steadfast friendship wonOf Hanumán the Wind-God's son.Counselled by him he told his griefTo great Sugríva, Vánar chief,Who, knowing all the tale, before

The sacred flame alliance swore.
Sugríva to his new-found friendTold his own story to the end:His hate of Báli for the wrongAnd insult he had borne so long.And Ráma lent a willing earAnd promised to allay his fear.Sugríva warned him of the mightOf Báli, matchless in the fight,And, credence for his tale to gain,Showed the huge fiend 
1b by Báli slain.
The prostrate corpse of mountain sizeSeemed nothing in the hero's eyes;He lightly kicked it, as it lay,And cast it twenty leagues 
2b away.
To prove his might his arrows throughSeven palms in line, uninjured, flew.He cleft a mighty hill apart,And down to hell he hurled his dart,Then high Sugríva's spirit rose,Assured of conquest o'er his foes.With his new champion by his sideTo vast Kishkindhá's cave he hied.Then, summoned by his awful shout,King Báli came in fury out,First comforted his trembling wife,Then sought Sugríva in the strife.One shaft from Ráma's deadly bowThe monarch in the dust laid low.

Then Ráma bade Sugríva reign
In place of royal Báli slain.Then speedy envoys hurried forthEastward and westward, south and north,Commanded by the grateful kingTidings of Ráma's spouse to bring.
Then by Sampáti's counsel led,
Brave Hanumán, who mocked at dread,Sprang at one wild tremendous leapTwo hundred leagues across the deep.To Lanká's 
3b town he urged his way,
Where Rávan held his royal sway.
p. 6
There pensive 'neath As'oka  1 boughs
He found poor Sitá, Ráma's spouse.He gave the hapless girl a ring,A token from her lord and king.A pledge from her fair hand he bore;Then battered down the garden door.Five captains of the host be slew,Seven sons of councillors o'erthrew;Crushed youthful Aksha on the field,Then to his captors chose to yield.Soon from their bonds his limbs were free,But honouring the high decreeWhich Brahmá had pronounced of yore,  
2

He calmly all their insults bore.
The town he burnt with hostile flame,And spoke again with Ráma's dame,Then swiftly back to Ráma flewWith tidings of the interview.   Then with Sugríva for his guide,Came Ráma to the ocean side.He smote the sea with shafts as brightAs sunbeams in their summer height,And quick appeared the Rivers' King  
3
Obedient to the summoning.A bridge was thrown by Nala o'erThe narrow sea from shore to shore.  
4
They crossed to Lanká's golden town,Where Ráma's hand smote Rávan down.Vibhishan there was left to reignOver his brother's wide domain.To meet her husband Sitá came;But Ráma, stung with ire and shame,With bitter words his wife addressedBefore the crowd that round her pressed.But Sitá, touched with noble ire,Gave her fair body to the fire.Then straight the God of Wind appeared,And words from heaven her honour cleared.And Ráma clasped his wife again,Uninjured, pure from spot and stain,Obedient to the Lord of FireAnd the high mandate of his sire.

Led by the Lord who rules the sky,
The Gods and heavenly saints drew nigh,And honoured him with worthy meed,Rejoicing in each glorious deed.His task achieved, his foe removed,
He triumphed, by the Gods approved,
By grace of Heaven he raised to lifeThe chieftains slain in mortal strife;Then in the magic chariot throughThe clouds to Nandigráma flew.Met by his faithful brothers there,He loosed his votive coil of hair:Thence fair Ayodhyá's town he gained,And o'er his father's kingdom reigned.Disease or famine ne'er oppressedHis happy people, richly blestWith all the joys of ample wealth,Of sweet content and perfect health.No widow mourned her well-loved mate,No sire his son's untimely fate.They feared not storm or robber's hand;No fire or flood laid waste the land:The Golden Age  
1b had come again
To bless the days of Ráma's reign.   From him, the great and glorious king,Shall many a princely scion spring.And he shall rule, beloved by men,Ten thousand years and hundreds ten, 
2b

And when his life on earth is past
To Brahmá's world shall go at last.'   Whoe'er this noble poem readsThat tells the tale of Ráma's deeds,Good as the Scriptures, he shall beFrom every sin and blemish free.Whoever reads the saving strain,With all his kin the heavens shall gain.Bráhmans who read shall gather henceThe highest praise for eloquence.The warrior, o'er the laud shall reign,The merchant, luck in trade obtain;And S'údras listening  
3b ne'er shall fail
To reap advantage from the tale.  4b
p. 7
Footnotes
1:1b Comparison with the Ganges is implied, that river 
being called the purifier of the world.
1:2b 'This name may have been given to the father of Válmíki allegorically. If we look at the derivation of the 
word (pra, before, and chetas, mind) it is as if the poet were called the son of Prometheus, the Forethinker.' 

SCHLEGEL.
1:3b Called in Sanskrit also Bála-Kánda, and in Hindi 
Bál-Kánd, i. e. the Book describing Ráma's childhood, 
bála meaning a boy up to his sixteenth year.
1:4b A divine saint, son of Brahmá. He is the eloquent 
messenger of the Gods, a musician of exquisite skill, 
and the inventor of the viná or Indian lute. He bears a strong resemblance to Hermes or Mercury.
1:5b This mystic syllable, said to typify the supreme 
Deity, the Gods collectively, the Vedas, the three 
spheres of the world, the three holy fires, the three steps of Vishnu etc., prefaces the prayers and most venerated writings of the Hindus.
2:1 This colloquy is supposed to have taken place about 
sixteen years after Ráma's return from his wanderings 
and occupation of his ancestral throne.
2:2 Called also S'ri and Lakshmi, the consort of Vishnu, 
the Queen of Beauty as well as the Dea Fortuna. Her 
birth 'from the full-flushed wave' is described in Canto XLV of this Book.
2:3 One of the most prominent objects of worship in the 
Rig-veda, Indra was superseded in later times by the 

more popular deities Vishnu and S'iva. He is the God of 
the firmament, and answers in many respects to the Jupiter Pluvius of the Romans. See Additional Notes.
2:4 The second God of the Trimúrti or Indian Trinity. 
Derived from the root vis' to penetrate, the meaning of 
the name appears to be he who penetrates or pervades all things. An embodiment of the preserving power of nature, he is worshipped as a Saviour who has nine times been incarnate for the good of the world and will descend on earth once more. See Additional Notes and Muir's Sanskrit Texts passim.
2:5 In Sanskrit devarshi. Rishi is the general appellation 
of sages, and another word is frequently prefixed to 
distinguish the degrees. A Brahmarshi is a theologian or Bráhmanical sage; a Rájarshi is a royal sage or sainted king; a Devarshi is a divine or deified sage or saint.
2:1b Trikálaj'na. Literally knower of the three times. 
Both Schlegel and Gorresio quote Homer's. 
Os aedae ta t eonta, ta t essomena, pro t eonta. 'That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view, The past, 
the present, and the future knew.' 
The Bombay edition reads trilokajna, who knows the 

three worlds (earth, air and heaven.) 'It is by topas 
(austere fervour) that rishis of subdued souls, subsisting on roots, fruits and air, obtain a vision of the three worlds with all things moving and stationary.' MANU, XI. 236.
2:2b Son of Manu, the first king of Kos'ala and founder 
of the solar dynasty or family of the Children of the 
Sun, the God of that luminary being the father of Manu.
2:3b The Indians paid great attention to the art of 
physiognomy and believed that character and fortune 
could be foretold not from the face only, but from marks upon the neck and hands. Three lines under the chin like those at the mouth of a conch (S'an'kha) were regarded as a peculiarly auspicious sign indicating, as did also the mark of Vishnu's discus on the hand, one born to be a chakravartin or universal emperor. In the palmistry of Europe the line of fortune, as well as the line of life, is in the hand. Cardan says that marks on the nails and teeth also show what is to happen to us: 'Sunt etiam in nobis vestigia quædam futurorum eyentuum in unguibus atque etiam in dentibus.' Though the palmy days of Indian chiromancy have passed away, the art is still to some extent studied and believed in.
3:1 Long arms were regarded as a sign of heroic 
strength.

3:2 'Veda means originally knowing or knowledge, and 
this name ia given by the Bráhmans not to one work, 
but to the whole body of their most ancient sacred literature. Veda is the same word which appears in the 
Greek ο•δα, I know, and in the English wise, wisdom, 
to wit. The name of Veda is commonly given to four collections of hymns, which are respectively known by the names of Rig-veda, Yajur-veda, Sáma-veda, and Atharva-veda.' 
'As the language of the Veda, the Sanskrit, is the most 
ancient type of the English of the present day, (Sanskrit and English are but varieties of one and the same language,) so its thoughts and feelings contain in reality the first roots and germs of that intellectual growth which by an unbroken chain connects our own generation with the ancestors of the Aryan race,--with those very people who at the rising and setting of the sun listened with trembling hearts to the songs of the Veda, that told them of bright powers above, and of a life to come after the sun of their own lives had set in the clouds of the evening. These men were the true ancestors of our race, and the Veda is the oldest book we have in which to study the first beginnings of our language, and of all that is embodied in language. We are by nature Aryan, Indo-European, not Semitic: our spiritual kith and kin are to be found in India, Persia, Greece, Italy, Germany: not in Mesopotamia, Egypt, or 

Palestine.' Chips from a German Workshop, Vol. I. pp. 
8. 4.
3:1b As with the ancient Persians and Scythians, Indian 
princes were carefully instructed in archery which 
stands for military science in general, of which, among Hindu heroes, it was the most important branch.
3:2b Chief of the three queens of Das'aratha and mother 
of Ráma.
3:3b From hima snow, (Greek χει¼-•ν Latin hiems) and álaya abode, the Mansion of snow.
3:4b The moon (Soma, Indu, Chandra etc.) is masculine with the Indians as with the Germans.
3:5b Kuvera, the Indian Plutus, or God of Wealth.
3:6b The events here briefly mentioned will be related fully in the course of the poem. The first four cantos are 
introductory, and are evidently the work of a later hand than Valmiki's.
4:1 'Chandra, or the Moon, is fabled to have been 
married to the twenty-seven daughters of the patriarch 
Daksha, or Asviní and the rest, who are in fact 

personifications of the Lunar Asterisms. His favourite 
amongst them was Rohiní to whom he so wholly devoted himself as to neglect the rest. They complained to their father, and Daksha repeatedly interposed, till, finding his remonstrances vain, he denounced a curse upon his son-in-law, in consequence of which he remained childless and became affected by consumption. The wives of Chandra having interceded in his behalf with their father, Daksha modified an imprecation which he could not recall, and pronounced that the decay should be periodical only, not permanent, and that it should alternate with periods of recovery. Hence the successive wane and increase of the Moon. Padma, Purána, Swarga-Khanda, Sec. II. Rohini in Astronomy is the fourth lunar mansion, containing live stars, the principal of which is Aldebaran.' WILSON, Specimens of the Hindu Theatre. Vol. I. p. 234. 
The Bengal recension has a different reading: 
'Shone with her husband like the light
Attendant on the Lord of Night.'
4:1b The garb prescribed for ascetics by Manu.
4:2b Mount Meru, situated like Kailása in the lofty 
regions to the north of the Himálayas, is celebrated in 
the traditions and myths of India. Meru and Kailása are 

the two Indian Olympi. Perhaps they were held in such 
veneration because the Sanskrit-speaking Indians remembered the ancient home where they dwelt with the other primitive peoples of their family before they descended to occupy the vast plains which extend between the Indus and the Ganges.' GOBRESIO.
4:3b The third God of the Indian Triad, the God of 
destruction and reproduction. See Additional Notes.
4:4b The epithet dmija, or twice-born, is usually appropriate to Bráhmans, but is applicable to the three 
higher castes. Investiture with the sacred thread and initiation of the neophyte into certain religious mysteries are regarded as his regeneration or second birth.
4:5b His shoes to be a memorial of the absent heir and 
to maintain his right. Kálidása (Raghuvans'a, XII. 17.) 
says that they were to be ahidevate or guardian deities of the kingdom.
5:1 Jatáyu, a semi-divine bird, the friend of Ráma, who 
fought in defence of Sitá.
5:2 Raghu was one of the most celebrated ancestors of Ráma whose commonest appellation is, therefore, 
Rághava or descendant of Raghu. Kálidása in the 

Raghuvans'a makes him the son of Dilipa and great-
grandfather of Ráma. See Idylls from the Sanskrit, 'Aja' and 'Dilipa'.
5:1b Dundhubi
5:2b Literally ten yojanas. The yojana is a measure of 
uncertain length variously reckoned as equal to nine 
miles, five, and a little less.
5:3b Ceylon
6:1 The Jonesia As'oka is a most beautiful tree bearing a 
profusion of red blossoms.
6:2 Brahmá, the Creator, is usually regarded as the first God of the Indian Trinity, although, as Kálidása says: 
'Of Brahma, Vishnu, S'iva, each may be First, second, 
third, amid the blessed Three.' 
   Brahmá had guaranteed Rávan's life against all 
enemies except man.
6:3 Ocean personified.
6:4 The rocks lying between Ceylon and the mainland 

are still called Ráma's Bridge by the Hindus.
6:1b The Bráhmans, with a system rather cosmogonical 
than chronological, divide the present mundane period 
into four ages or yugas as they call them: the Krita, the Tretá, the Dwápara, and the Kali. The Krita, cailed also the Deva-yuga or that of the Gods, is the age of truth, the perfect age, the Tretá is the age of the three sacred fires, domestic and sacrificial; the Dwápara is the age of doubt; the Kali, the present age, is the age of evil.' GORRESIO.
6:2b The ancient kings of India enjoyed lives of more 
than patriarchal length as will appear in the course of 
the poem.
6:3b S'údras, men of the fourth and lowest pure caste, 
were not allowed to read the poem, but might hear it 
recited.
6:4b The three s'lokas or distichs which these twelve 
lines represent are evidently a still later and very 
awkward addition to the introduction.
Next: Canto II: Brahmá's Visit

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO II: BRAHMÁ'S VISIT
Válmíki, graceful speaker,heard,
To highest admiration stirred.To him whose fame the tale rehearsedHe paid his mental worship first;Then with his pupil humbly bentBefore the saint most eloquent.Thus honoured and dismissed the seerDeparted to his heavenly sphere.Then from his cot Válmíki hiedTo Tamasá's  
1 sequestered side,
Not far remote from Gangáa's tide.He stood and saw the ripples rollPellucid o'er a pebbly shoal.To Bharadvája  
2 by his side
He turned in ecstasy, and cried:'See, pupil dear, this lovely sight,The smooth-floored shallow, pure and bright,With not a speck or shade to mar,And clear as good men's bosoms are.Here on the brink thy pitcher lay,And bring my zone of bark, I pray.Here will I bathe: the rill has not,To lave the limbs a fairer spot.

Do quickly as I bid, nor waste
The precious time; away, and haste.'   Obedient to his master's bestQuick from the cot he brought the vest;The hermit took it from his hand,And tightened round his waist the band;Then duly dipped and bathed him there,And muttered low his secret prayer.To spirits and to Gods he madeLibation of the stream, and strayedViewing the forest deep and wideThat spread its shade on every side.Close by the bank he saw a pairOf curlews sporting fearless there.But suddenly with evil mindAn outcast fowler stole behind,And, with an aim too sure and true,The male bird near the hermit slew.
The wretched hen in wild despair
With fluttering pinions beat the air,And shrieked a long and bitter cryWhen low on earth she saw him lie,Her loved companion, quivering, dead,His dear wings with his lifebiood red;And for her golden crested mateShe mourned, and was disconsolate.   The hermit saw the slaughtered bird,And all his heart with ruth was stirred.

The fowler's impious deed distressed
His gentle sympathetic breast,And while the curlew's sad cries rangWithin his ears, the hermit sang:'No fame be thine for endless time,Because, base outcast, of thy crime,Whose cruel hand was fain to slayOne of this gentle pair at play!'E'en as he spoke his bosom wroughtAnd laboured with the wondering thoughtWhat was the speech his ready tongueHad uttered when his heart was wrung.He pondered long upon the speech,Recalled the words and measured each,And thus exclaimed the saintly guideTo Bharadvája by his side:'With equal lines of even feet,With rhythm and time and tone complete,The measured form of words I spokeIn shock of grief be termed a s'loke.'  
1b
And Bharadvája, nothing slowHis faithful love and zeal to show,Answered those words of wisdom, 'BeThe name, my lord, as pleases thee.'   As rules prescribe the hermit tookSome lustral water from the brook.But still on this his constant thoughtKept brooding, as his home he sought;While Bharadvája paced behind,

A pupil sage of lowly mind,
And in his hand a pitcher boreWith pure fresh water brimming o'er.Soon as they reached their calm retreatThe holy hermit took his seat;His mind from worldly cares recalled,And mused in deepest thought enthralled.   Then glorious Brahmá,  
2b Lord Most High.
Creator of the earth and sky,
p. 8
The four-faced God, to meet the sageCame to Válmíki's hermitage.Soon as the mighty God he saw,Up sprang the saint in wondering awe.Mute, with clasped hands, his head he bent,And stood before him reverent.His honoured guest he greeted well,Who bade him of his welfare tell;Gave water for his blessed feet,Brought offerings, 
1 and prepared a seat,
In honoured place the God Most HighSate down, and bade the saint sit nigh.There sate before Válmíki's eyesThe Father of the earth and skies;But still the hermit's thoughts were bentOn one thing only, all intentOn that poor curlew's mournful fate

Lamenting for her slaughtered mate;
And still his lips, in absent mood,The verse that told his grief, renewed:'Woe to the fowler's impious handThat did the deed that folly planned;That could to needless death devoteThe curlew of the tuneful throat!'   The heavenly Father smiled in glee,And said, 'O best of hermits', see,A verse, unconscious thou hast made;No longer be the task delayed.Seek not to trace, with labour vain,The unpremeditated strain.The tuneful lines thy lips rehearsedSpontaneous from thy bosom burst,Then come, O best of seers, relateThe life of Ráma good and great,The tale that saintly Nárad told,In all its glorious length unfold.Of all the deeds his arm has doneUpon this earth, omit not one,And thus the noble life recordOf that wise, brave, and virtuous lord.
His every act to day displayed,
His secret life to none betrayed:How Lakshman, how the giants fought;With high emprise and hidden thought:And all that Janak's child  
1b befell

Where all could see, where none could tell,
The whole of this shall truly beMade known, O best of saints, to thee.In all thy poem, through my grace,No word of falsehood shall have place.Begin the story, aud rehearseThe tale divine in charming verse.As long as in this firm-set landThe streams shall flow, the mountains stand,So long throughout the world, be sure,The great Rámáyan shall endure. 
2b
While the Rámáyan's ancient strainShall glorious in the earth remain,To higher spheres shalt thou ariseAnd dwell with me above the skies!   He spoke, and vanished into air,And left Válmíki wondering there.The pupils of the holy man,Moved by their love of him, beganTo chant that verse, and ever moreThey marvelled as they sang it o'er:'Behold, the four-lined balanced rime,Repeated over many a time,In words that from the hermit brokeIn shock of grief, becomes a s'loke.'This measure now Válmíki choseWherein his story to compose.In hundreds of such verses, sweetWith equal lines and even feet,

The saintly poet, lofty-souled,
The glorious deeds of Ráma told.
Footnotes
7:1 There are several rivers in India of this name, now 
corrupted into Tarse. The river here spoken of is that 
which falls into the Ganges a little below Allahabad.
7:2 In Book II, Canto LIV, we meet with a saint of this 
name presiding over a convent of disciples in his 
hermitage at the confluence of the Ganges and the Jumna. Thence the later author of these introductory cantos has borrowed the name and person, inconsistently indeed, but with the intention of enhancing the dignity of the poet by ascribing to him so celebrated a disciple. SCHLEGEL
7:1b The poet plays upon the similarity in sound of the 
two words: s'oka, means grief, s'loka, the heroic 
measure in which the poem is composed. It need scarcely be said that the derivation is fanciful.
7:2b Brahmá, the Creator, is usually regarded as the 
first person of the divine triad of India. Tne four heads 
with which he is represented are supposed to have 

allusion to the four corners of the earth which he is 
sometimes considered to personify. As an object of adoration Brahmá has been entirely superseded by S'iva and Vishnu. In the whole of India there is, I believe, but one temple dedicated to his worship. In this point the first of the Indian triad curiously resembles the last of the divine fraternity of Greece, Aïdes the brother of Zeus and Foseidon. 'In all Greece, says Pausanias, there is no single temple of Aïdes except at a single spot in Ehs. See Gladstone's Juventus Mundi, p. 253.
8:1 The argha or arghya was a libation or offering to a 
deity, a Bráhman, or other venerable personage. 
According to one authority it consisted of water, milk, the points of Kúsa-grass, curds, clarified butter, rice, barley, and white mustard, according to another, of saffron, bel, unbroken grain, flowers, curds, dúrbá-grass, kúsa-grass, and sesamum.
Next: Canto III.: The Argument.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO III.: THE ARGUMENT.
The hermit thus with watchful heed
Received the poem's pregnant seed,And looked with eager thought aroundIf fuller knowledge might be found.    
p. 9
His lips with water first bedewed,  1
He sate, in reverent attitudeOn holy grass,  
2 the points all bent
Together toward the orient;  3
And thus in meditation heEntered the path of poesy.Then clearly, through his virtue's might,All lay discovered to his sight,Whate'er befell, through all their life,Ráma, his brother, and his wife:And Das'aratha and each queenAt every time, in every scene:His people too, of every sort;The nobles of his princely court:Whate'er was said, whate'er decreed,

Each time they sate each plan and deed:
For holy thought and fervent riteHad so refined his keener sightThat by his sanctity his viewThe present, past, and future knew,And he with mental eye could grasp,Like fruit within his fingers clasp,The life of Ráma, great and good,Roaming with Sitá in the wood.He told, with secret piercing eyes,The tale of Ráma's high emprise.Each listening ear that shall entice,A sea of pearls of highest price.Thus good Válmíki, sage divine,Rehearsed the tale of Raghu's line,As Nárad, heavenly saint, beforeHad traced the story's outline o'er.He sang of Ráma's princely birth,His kindness and heroic worth;His love for all, his patient youth,His gentleness and constant truth,And many a tale and legend oldBy holy Vis'vámitra told.How Janak's child he wooed and won,Aud broke the bow that bent to none.How he with every virtue fraughtHis namesake Ráma  
4 met and fought.
The choice of Ráma for the throne;The malice by Kalseyí shown,

Whose evil counsel marred the plan
And drove him forth a banisht man.How the king grieved and groaned,and cried,
And swooned away and pining died.
The subjects' woe when thus bereft;And how the following crowds he left:With Guha talked, and firmly sternOrdered his driver to return.How Gangá's farther shore he gained;By Bharadvája entertained,By whose advice be journeyed stillAnd came to Chitrakúta's hill.How there he dwelt and built a cot;How Bharat journeyed to the spot;His earnest supplication made;Drink-offerings to their father paid;The sandals given by Ráma's hand,As emblems of his right to stand:How from his presence Bharat wentAnd years in Nandigráma spent.How Ráma entered Dandak woodAnd in Sutíkhna's presence stood.The favour Anasúyá showed,The wondrous balsam she bestowed.How Sárabhangá's dwelling placeThey sought; saw Indra face to face;The meeting with Agastya gained;The heavenly bow from him obtained.

How Ráma with Virádha met;
Their home in Panchavata set.How S'úrpanakhá underwentThe mockery and disfigurement.Of Trígirá's and Khara's fall,Of Rávan roused at vengeance call,Máricha doomed, without escape;The fair Videhan  
1b lady's rape.
How Ráma wept and raved in vain,And how the Vulture-king was slain.How Ráma fierce Kabandha slew;Then to the side of Pampá drew.Met Hanumán, and her whose vowsWere kept beneath the greenwood boughs.How Raghu's son the lofty-souled,On Pampá's bank wept uncontrolled,Then journeyed, Rishyamúk to reach,And of Sugríva then had speech.The friendship made, which both had sought:How Báli and Sugríva fought.How Báli in the strife was slain,And how Sugríva came to reign.The treaty, Tára's wild lament;The rainy nights in watching spent.The wrath of Raghu's lion son;The gathering of the hosts in one.The sending of the spies about,And all the regions pointed out.The ring by Ráma's hand bestowed;

The cave wherein the bear abode.
The fast proposed, their lives to end;Sampati gained to be their friend.
p. 10
The scaling of the hill, the leapOf Hanumán across the deep.Ocean's command that bade them seekMaináka of the lofty peak.The death of Sinhiká, the sightOf Lanká with her palace brightHow Hanuman stole in at eve;His plan the giants to deceive.How through the square he made his wayTo chambers where the women lay,Within the As'oka garden cameAnd there found Ráma's captive dame,His colloquy with her he sought,And giving of the ring he brought.How Sítá gave a gem o'erjoyed;How Hanumán the grove destroyed,How giantesses trembling fled,And servant fiends were smitten dead.How Hanumán was seized; their ireWhen Lanká blazed with hostile fire.His leap across the sea once more;The eating of the honey store,How Ráma he consoled, and how

He showed the gem from Sítá's brow,
With Ocean, Ráma's interview;The bridge that Nala o'er it threw.The crossing, and the sitting downAt night round Lanká's royal town.The treaty with Vibhíshan made:The plan for Rávan's slaughter laid.How Kumbhakarna in his prideAnd Meghanáda fought and died.How Rávan in the fight was slain,And captive Sítá brought again.Vibhíshan set upon the throne;The flying chariot Pushpak shown.How Brahmá and the Gods appeared,And Sítá's doubted honour cleared.How In the flying car they rodeTo Bháradvája's cabin abode,The Wind-God's son sent on afar;How Bharat met the flying car.How Ráma then was king ordained;The legions their discharge obtained.How Ráma cast his queen away;How grew the people's love each day.Thus did the saint Válmíki tellWhate'er in Ráma's life befell,And in the closing verse allThat yet to come will once befall

Footnotes
8:1b Sitá, daughter of Janak king of Mithilá.
8:2b 'I congratulate myself,' says Schlegel in the preface 
to his, alas, unfinished edition of the Rámáyan, 'that, by 
the favour of the Supreme Deity, I have been allowed to begin so great a work; I glory and make my boast that I too after so many ages have helped to confirm that ancient oracle declared to Válmíki by the Father of Gods and men: 
Dum stabunt montes, campis dum flumina current, 
Usque tuum toto carmen, celebrabitur orbe.'
9:1 'The sipping of water is a requisite introduction of 
all rites: without it, says the Sámha Purana, all acts of 
religion are vain.' COLEBROOKE.
9:2 The darhha or kus'a (Pea cynosuroides), a kind of 
grass used in sacrifice by the Hindus as cerbena was by 
the Romans.
9:3 The direction in which the grass hould be placed 
upon the ground as a seat for the Gods, on occasion of 
offerings made to them.

9:4 Parasúráma or Ráma with the Axe. See Canto 
LXXIV.
9:1b Sitá. Videha was the country of which Mithilá was the capital.
Next: Canto IV.: The Rhapsodists.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IV.: THE RHAPSODISTS.
When to the end the tale was brought,
Rose in the sage's mind the thought;Now who throughout this earth will go,And tell it forth that all may know?'
As thus he mused with anxious breast,
Behold, in hermit's raiment dressed,Kus'a and Lava  
1 came to greet
Their master and embrace his feet.The twins he saw, that princely pairSweet-voiced, who dwelt beside him thereNone for the task could be more fit,For skilled were they in Holy Writ;And so the great Rámáyan, fraughtWith lore divine, to them he taught:The lay whose verses sweet and clearTake with delight the listening ear,That tell of Sítá's noble lifeAnd Rávan's fall in battle strife.Great joy to all who hear they bring,Sweet to recite and sweet to sing.For music's sevenfold notes are there,And triple measure,  
2 wrought with care

With melody and tone and time,
And flavours  3 that enhance the rime:
Heroic might has ample place,And loathing of the false and base,With anger, mirth, and terror, blentWith tenderness, surprise, content.When, half the hermit's grace to gain,And half because they loved the strain,The youth within their hearts had storedThe poem that his lips outpoured,Válmíki kissed them on the head,As at his feet they bowed, and said'Recite ye this heroic songIn tranquil shades where sages throngRecite it where the good resort,In lowly home and royal court,'The hermit ceased. The tuneful pairLike heavenly minstrels sweet and fairIn music's art divinely skilled,Their saintly master's word fulfilled.Like Ráma's self, from whom they came,They shared their size in face and frame,
p. 11
As though from some fair sculptured stoneTwo selfsame images had grown.Sometimes the pair rose up to sing,Surrounded by a holy ring,

Where seated on the grass bad met
Full many a musing anchoret.Then tears bedimmed those gentle eyes,As transport took them and surprise,And as they listened every oneCried in delight, Well done! Well done!Those sages versed in holy lorePraised the sweet minstrels more and more:And wondered at the singers' skill,And the bard's verses sweeter still,Which laid so clear before the eyeThe glorious deeds of days gone by.Thus by the virtuous hermits praised,Inspirited their voice they raised.Pleased with the song this holy manWould give the youths a water-can;One gave a fair ascetic dress,Or sweet fruit from the wilderness.One saint a black-deer's hide would bring,And one a sacrificial string:One, a clay pitcher from his hoard,And one, a twisted munja cord.  
1
One in his joy an axe would find,One, braid, their plaited locks to bind.One gave a sacrificial cup,One rope to tie their fagots up;While fuel at their feet was laid,Or hermit's stool of fig-tree made.All gave, or if they gave not, none

Forgot at least a benison.
Some saints, delighted with their lays,Would promise health and length of days;Others with surest words would addSome boon to make their spirit glad.In such degree of honour thenThat song was held by holy men:That living song which life can give,By which shall many a minstrel live.In seat of kings, in crowded hall,They sang the poem, praised of all.And Ráma chanced to hear their lay,While he the votive steed  
2 would slay,
And sent fit messengers to bringThe minstrel pair before the king.They came, and found the monarch highEnthroned in gold, his brothers nigh;While many a minister below,And noble, sate in lengthened row.
The youthful pair awhile he viewed
Graceful in modest attitude,And then in words like these addressedHis brother Lakshman and the rest:'Come, listen to the wondrous strainRecited by these godlike twain.Sweet singers of a story fraughtWith melody and lofty thought.'   The pair, with voices sweet and strong,

Rolled the full tide of noble song,
With tone and accent deftly blentTo suit the changing argument.Mid that assembly loud and clearRang forth that lay so sweet to hear,That universal rapture stoleThrough each man's frame and heart and soul.'These minstrels, blest with every signThat marks a high and princely line,   In holy shades who dwell,Enshrined in Saint Válmiki's lay,A monument to live for aye,   My deeds in song shall tell.'Thus Ráma spoke: their breasts were fired,And the great tale, as if inspired,   The youths began to sing,While every heart with transport swelled,And mute and rapt attention held   The concourse and the king,
Footnotes
10:1 The twin sons if Ráma and Sítá, born after Ráma 
had repartiated Sítá, and brought up in the hermitage of 
Válmíki. As they were the first rhapsodists the combined name Kus'alava signifies a reciter of paeans or an improvisatore even to the present day.

10:2 Perhaps the base, tenor, and treble, or quick, slow 
and middle times. We know but little of the ancient 
music of the Hindus.
10:3 Eight flavours or sentiments are usually 
enumerated, love, mirth, tenderness, anger, heroism, 
terror, disgust, and surprise; tranquility or content, or paternal tenderness, is sometimes considered the ninth. WILSON. See the Sáhitya Darpana or Mirror of Composition translated by Dr. Ballantyne and Bábá Pramadádása Mitra in the Bibliotheca Indica.
11:1 Saccharum Munja is a plant from whose fibres is 
twisted the sacred string which a Bráhman wears over 
one shoulder after he has been initiated by a rite which in some respects answers to confirmation.
11:2 A description of an As'vamedha or horse sacrifice 
is given in Canto XIII. of this Book.
Next: Canto V.: Ayodhyá

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO V.: AYODHYÁ
   'Ikshváku's sons from days of old
Were ever brave and mighty-souled.The land their arms had made their ownWas bounded by the sea alone.Their holy works have won them praise,Through countless years, from Manu's days.Their ancient sire was Sagar, heWhose high command dug out the sea:  
1b
With sixty thousand sons to throngAround him as he marched along.From them this glorious tale proceeds;The great Rámáyan tells their deeds.This noble song whose lines contain,Lessons of duty, love, and gain,We two will now at length recite,While good men listen with delight.   On Sarjú's  
2b bank, of ample size,
The happy realm of Kos'al lies,
p. 12
With fertile length of fair champaignAnd flocks and herds and wealth of grain.

There, famous in her old renown,
Ayodhyá 1 stands, the royal town,
In bygone ages built and plannedBy sainted Manu's 
2 princely hand.
Imperial seat! her walls extendTwelve measured leagues from end to end,And three in width from side to side,With square and palace beautified.Her gates at even distance stand;Her ample roads are wisely planned.Right glorious is her royal streetWhere streams allay the dust and heat.On level ground in even rowHer houses rise in goodly show:Terrace and palace, arch and gateThe queenly city decorate.High are her ramparts, strong and vast,By ways at even distance passed,With circling moat, both deep and wide,And store of weapons fortified.
King Das'aratha, lofty-souled,
That city guarded and controlled,With towering Sál trees belted round, 
3
And many a grove and pleasure ground,As royal Indra, throned on high,Rules his fair city in the sky. 
4
She seems a painted city, fairWith chess-board line and even square. 
5

And cool boughs shade the lovely lake
Where weary men their thirst may slake.
There gilded chariots gleam and shine,And stately piles the Gods enshrine.There gay sleek people ever throngTo festival and dance and song.A mine is she of gems and sheen,The darling home of Fortune's Queen.With noblest sort of drink and meat,The fairest rice and golden wheat,And fragrant with the chaplet's scentWith holy oil and incense blent.With many an elephant and steed,And wains for draught and cars for speed.With envoys sent by distant kings,And merchants with their precious things,With banners o'er her roofs that play,And weapons that a hundred slay; 
1b
All warlike engines framed by man,And every class of artisan.A city rich beyond compareWith bards and minstrels gathered there,And men and damsels who entranceThe soul with play and song and dance.In every street is heard the lute,The drum, the tabret, and the flute,The Veda chanted soft and low,The ringing of the archer's bow;

With bands of godlike heroes skilled
In every warlike weapon, filled,And kept by warriors from the foe,As Nágas guard their home below. 
2b
There wisest Bráhmans evermore   The flame of worship feed,And versed in all the Vedas' lore,   Their lives of virtue lead.Truthful and pure, they freely give;   They keep each sense controlled,And in their holy fervour live   Like the great saints of old.
Footnotes
11:1b This exploit is related in Canto XI.
11:2b The Sarjú or Ghaghra, anciently called Sarayú, 
rises in the Himalayas, and after flowing through the 
province of Oudb, falls into the Gauges.
12:1 The ruins of the ancient capital of Rama and the 
Children of the Sun may still be traced in the present 
Ajudhyá near Fyzabad. Ajudhyá is the Jerusalem or Mecca of the Hindus.

12:2 A legislator and saint, the son of Brahmá or a 
personification of Brahmá himself, the creator of the 
world, and progenitor of mankind. Derived from the root man to think, the word means originally man, the thinker, and is found in this sense in the Rig-veda. 
Manu as a legislator is identified with the Cretan Minos, 
as progenitor of mankind with the German Mannus: 'Celebrant carminibus antiquis, quod unum apud illos memoriae et annalium genus est, Tuisconem deum terra editum, et fllium Mannum, originem gentis conditoresque.' TACITUS, Germania, Cap. II.
12:3 The Sál (Shorea Robusta) is a valuable timber tree 
of considerable height.
12:4 The city of Indra is called Amarávati or Home of the Immortals.
12:5 Schlegel thinks that this refers to the marble of different colours with which the houses were adorned. It 
seems more natural to understand it as implying the regularity of the streets and houses.
Next: Canto VI.: The King.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VI.: THE KING.
There reigned a king of name revered,
To country and to town endeared,Great Das'aratha, good and sage.Well read in Scripture's holy page:
p. 13
Upon his kingdom's weal intent,Mighty and brave and provident;The pride of old Ikshváku's seedFor lofty thought and righteous deed.Peer of the saints, for virtues famed,For foes subdued and passions tamed:A rival in his wealth untoldOf Indra and the Lord of Gold.Like Manu first of kings, he reigned.And worthily his state maintained,For firm and just and ever trueLove, duty, gain he kept in view,And ruled his city rich and free,Like Indra's Amarávatí.And worthy of so fair a placeThere dwelt a just and happy race   With troops of children blest.

Each man contented sought no more,
Nor longed with envy for the store   By richer friends possessed.For poverty was there unknown,And each man counted as his own   Kine, steeds, and gold, and grain.All dressed in raiment bright and clean,And every townsman might be seenWith earrings, wreath, or chain.None deigned to feed on broken fare,And none was false or stingy there.A piece of gold, the smallest pay,Was earned by labour for a day.On every arm were bracelets worn,And none was faithless or forsworn,   A braggart or unkind.None lived upon another's wealth,None pined with dread or broken health,   Or dark disease of mind.High-souled were all. The slanderous word,The boastful lie, were never heard.Each man was constant to his vows,And lived devoted to his spouse.No other love his fancy knew,And she was tender, kind, and true.Her dames were fair of form and face,With charm of wit and gentle grace,With modest raiment simply neat,And winning manners soft and sweet.

The twice-born sages, whose delight
Was Scripture's page and holy rite,Their calm and settled course pursued,Nor sought the menial multitude.In many a Scripture each was versed,And each the flame of worship nursed,   And gave with lavish hand.Each paid to Heaven the offerings due,And none was godless or untrue   In all that holy band.To Bráhmans, as the laws ordain,The Warrior caste were ever fain   The reverence due to pay;And these the Vais'yas' peaceful crowd,Who trade and toil for gain, were proud
   To honour and obey;
And all were by the S'údras  
1 served,
Who never from their duty swerved,Their proper worship all addressedTo Bráhman, spirits, God, and guest.Pure and unmixt their rites remained,Their race's honour ne'er was stained.  
2
Cheered by his grandsons, sons, and wife,Each passed a long and happy life.Thus was that famous city heldBy one who all his race excelled,   Blest in his gentle reign,As the whole land aforetime swayed

By Manu, prince of men, obeyed
   Her king from main to main.And heroes kept her, strong and brave,As lions guard their mountain cave:Fierce as devouring flame they burned,And fought till death, but never turned.Horses had she of noblest breed,Like Indra's for their form and speed,From Váhlí's  
3 hills and Sindhu's  4 sand,
Vanáyu  5 and Kámboja's land.  6
p. 14
Her noble elephants had strayedThrough Vindhyan and Himálayan shade,Gigantic in their bulk and height,Yet gentle in their matchless might.They rivalled well the world-spread fameOf the great stock from which they came,   Of Váman, vast of size,Of Mahápadma's glorious line,Thine, Aujan, and, Airávat, thine. 
1
   Upholders of the skies.With those, enrolled in fourfold class,Who all their mighty kin surpass,Whom men Matangas name,And Mrigas spotted black and white,And Bhadras of unwearied might,And Mandras hard to tame.  
2

Thus, worthy of the name she bore, 3
Ayodhyá for a league or more
   Cast a bright glory round,Where Das'aratha wise and greatGoverned his fair ancestral state,   With every virtue crowned.Like Indra in the skies he reignedIn that, good town whose wall contained   High domes and turrets proud,With gates and arcs of triumph decked,And sturdy barriers to protect   Her gay and countless crowd.
Footnotes
12:1b The Sataghní, i. e. centicide, or slayer of a 
hundred, is generally supposed to be a sort of fire-arms, 
or the ancient Indian rocket; but it is also described as a stone set round with iron spikes.
12:2b The Nágas (serpents) are demigods with a human 
face and serpent body. They inhabit Pátála or the 
regions under the earth. Bhogavatí is the name of their capital city. Serpents are still worshipped in India. See Fergusson'a Tree and Serpent Worship.

13:1 The fourth and lowest pure caste whose duty was 
to serve the three first classes.
13:2 By forbidden marriages between persons of different castes.
13:3 Váhlí or Váhlika is Bactriana; its name is preserved in the modern Balkh.
13:4 The Sanskrit word Sindhu is in the singular the name of the river Indus, in the plural of the people and 
territories on its banks. The name appears as Hidhu in the cuneiform inscription of Darius son of Hystaspes, in which the nations tributary to that king are enumerated. 
The Hebrew form is Hodda (Esther, 1. I.) In Zend it 
appears as Hendu in a somewhat wider sense. With the Persians later the signification of Hind seems to have co-extended with their increasing acquaintance with the country. The weak Ionic dialect omitted the Persian h, and we find in Hecatæus and Herodotus Indos and hae Indikae. In this form the Romans received the names and transmitted them to us. The Arabian geographers in their ignorance that Hind and Sind are two forms of the same word have made of them two brothers and traced their decent from Noah. See Lassen's Indische Alterthumskunde Vol. I. pp. 2, 3.

13:5 The situation of Vanáyu is not exactly determined: 
it seems to have lain to the north-west of India.
13:6 Kámboja was probably still further to the north-west. Lassen thinks that the 
p. 14 name is etymologically 
connected with Cambyses which in the cuneiform 
inscription of Behistun is written Ka(m)bujia.
Next: Canto VII.: The Ministers.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VII.: THE MINISTERS.
Two sages, holy saints, had he,
His ministers and priests to be:Vasishtha, faithful to advise.And Vámadeva, Scripture-wise.
Eight other lords around him stood,
All skilled to counsel, wise and good;Jayanta, Vijay, Dhrishti boldIn fight, affairs of war controlled:Siddhárth and Arthasádhak trueWatched o'er expense and revenue,And Dharmapál and wise AœokOf right and law and justice spoke.With these the sage Sumantra, skilledTo urge the car, high station filled.   All these in knowledge duly trainedEach passion and each sense restrained:With modest manners, nobly bredEach plan and nod and look they read,Upon their neighbours' good intent,Most active and benevolent:As sit the Vasus  
1b round their king.
They sate around him counselling.

They ne'er in virtue's loftier pride
Another's lowly gifts decried.In fair and seemly garb arrayed,No weak uncertain plans they made.Well skilled in business, fair and just,They gained the people's love and trust,And thus without oppression storedThe swelling treasury of their lord,Bound in sweet friendship each to each,They spoke kind thoughts in gentle speech.They looked alike with equal eyeOn every caste, on low and high.Devoted to their king, they sought,Ere his tongue spoke, to learn his thought.And knew, as each occasion rose,To bide their counsel or disclose.In foreign land--or in their ownWhatever passed, to them was known.By secret spies they timely knewWhat men were doing or would do.Skilled in the grounds of war and peaceThey saw the monarch's state increase,Watching his weal with conquering eyeThat never let occasion by,While nature lent her aid to blessTheir labours with unbought success.Never for anger, lust, or gain,Would they their lips with falsehood stain.Inclined to mercy they could scan

The weakness and the strength of man.
They fairly judged both high and low,And ne'er would wrong a guiltless foe;Yet if a fault were proved, each oneWould punish e'en his own dear son.But there and in the kingdom's boundNo thief or man impure was found:None of loose life or evil fame,No temper of another's dame.Contented with their lot each caste
p. 15
Calm days in blissful quiet passed;And, all in fitting tasks employed,Country and town deep rest enjoyed,With these wise lords around his throne   The monarch justly reigned,And making every heart his own   The love of all men gained.With trusty agents, as beseems,   Each distant realm he scanned,As the sun visits with his beams   Each corner of the land.Ne'er would he on a mightier foe   With hostile troops advance,Nor at an equal strike a blow   In war's delusive chance.These lords in council bore their part

With ready brain and faithful heart,
With skill and knowledge, sense and tact,Good to advise and bold to act.And high and endless fame he won   With these to guide his schemes,As, risen in his might, the sun   Wins glory with his beams.
Footnotes
14:1 The elephants of Indra and other deities who 
preside over the four points of the compass.
14:2 There are four kinds of elephants. 1 Bhaddar. It is well proportioned, has an erect head, a broad chest, 
large ears, a long tail, and is bold and can bear fatigue. 2 Mand. It is black, has yellow eyes, a uniformly sized body, and is wild and ungovernable. 3 Mirg. It has a whitish skin, with black spots. 4 Mir. It has a small head, and obeys readily. It gets frightened when it thunders.' Ain-i-Ahbarí * . Translated by H. Blochmann, Ain 41, The Imperial Elephant Stables.
14:3 Ayodhyá means not to be fought against.
14:1b Attendants of Indra, eight Gods whose names 

signify fire, light aud its phenomena.
Next: Canto VIII.: Sumantra's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VIII.: SUMANTRA'S SPEECH.
But splendid, just, and great of mind,
The childless king for offspring pined.No son had he his name to grace,Transmitter of his royal race.Long had his anxious bosom wrought,And as he pondered rose the thought:'A votive steed 'twere good to slay,So might a son the gift repay.'Before his lords his plan he laid,And bade them with their wisdom aid:Then with these words Sumantra, bestOf royal counsellors, addressed:'Hither, Vas'ishtha at their head,Let all my priestly guides be led.'To him Sumantra made reply:'Hear, Sire, a tale of days gone by.To many a sage in time of old,Sanatkumár, the saint, foretoldHow from thine ancient line, O King,A son, when years came round, should spring.'Here dwells,' 'twas thus the seer began,'Of Kas'yap's  
1 race, a holy man,
Vibhándak named: to him shall springA son, the famous Rishyas'ring.

Bred with the deer that round him roam,
The wood shall be that hermit's home.
To him no mortal shall be known
Except his holy sire alone.Still by those laws shall he abideWhich lives of youthful Bráhmans guide,Obedient to the strictest ruleThat forms the young ascetic's school:And all the wondering world shall hearOf his stern life and penance drear;His care to nurse the holy fireAnd do the bidding of his sire.Then, seated on the Angas'  
1b throne,
Shall Lomapád to fame be known.But folly wrought by that great kingA plague upon the land shall bring;No rain for many a year shall fallAnd grievous drought shall ruin all.The troubled king with many a prayerShall bid the priests some cure declare:'The lore of Heaven 'tis yours to know,Nor are ye blind to things below:Declare, O holy men, the wayThis plague to expiate and stay.'Those best of Bráhmans shall reply:'By every art, O Monarch, tryHither to bring Vibhándak's child,Persuaded, captured, or beguiled.

And when the boy is hither led
To him thy daughter duly wed.'
But how to bring that wondrous boy
His troubled thoughts will long employ,And hopeless to achieve the taskHe counsel of his lords will ask,And bid his priests and servants bringWith honour saintly Rishyas'ring.But when they hear the monarch's speech,All these their master will beseech,With trembling hearts and looks of woe,To spare them, for they fear to go.And many a plan will they declare   And crafty plots will frame,And promise fair to show him there,   Unforced, with none to blame.On every word his lords shall say,   The king will meditate,And on the third returning day   Recall them to debate.Then this shall be the plan agreed,   That damsels shall be sentAttired in holy hermits' weed,   And skilled in blandishment,That they the hermit may beguileWith every art and amorous wile
p. 16

   Whose use they know so well,
And by their witcheries seduceThe unsuspecting young recluse   To leave his father's cell.Then when the boy with willing feetShall wander from his calm retreat   And in that city stand,The troubles of the king shall end,And streams of blessed rain descend   Upon the thirsty land.Thus shall the holy Rishyas'ringTo Lomapád, the mighty king,   By wedlock be allied;For S'ántá, fairest of the fair,In mind and grace beyond compare,   Shall be his royal bride.He, at the Offering of the Steed,The flames with holy oil shall feed,And for King Das'aratha gainSons whom his prayers have begged in vain.''I have repeated, Sire, thus far,The words of old Sanatkumár,In order as he spoke them thenAmid the crowd of holy men.'Then Das'aratha cried with joy,'Say how they brought the hermit boy.'

Footnotes
15:1 Kas'yap was a grandson of the God Brahmá. He is 
supposed to have given his name to Kashmír = 
Kas'yapa-míra, Kas'yap's Lake.
15:1b The people of Anga. 'Anga is said in the lexicons 
to be Bengal; but here certainly another region is 
intended situated at the confluence of the Sarjú with the Ganges, and not far distant from Das'aratha's dominions.' GORRESIO. It comprised part of Behar and Bhagulpur.
Next: Canto IX.: Rishyas'ring.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IX.: RISHYAS'RING.
The wise Sumantra, thus addressed,
Unfolded at the king's behestThe plan the lords in council laidTo draw the hermit from the shade:'The priest, amid the lordly crowd,To Lomapád thus spoke aloud:'Hear, King, the plot our thoughts have framed,A harmless trick by all unblamed.Far from the world that hermit's childLives lonely in the distant wild:A stranger to the joys of sense,His bliss is pain and abstinence;And all unknown are women yetTo him, a holy anchoret.The gentle passions we will wakeThat with resistless influence shake   The hearts of men; and heDrawn by enchantment strong and sweetShall follow from his lone retreat,   And come and visit thee.Let ships be formed with utmost careThat artificial trees may bear,   And sweet fruit deftly made;Let goodly raiment, rich and rare,

And flowers, and many a bird be there
   Beneath the leafy shade.Upon the ships thus decked a bandOf young and lovely girls shall stand,Rich in each charm that wakes desire,And eyes that burn with amorous fire;Well skilled to sing, and play, and danceAnd ply their trade with smile and glanceLet these, attired in hermits' dress,Betake them to the wilderness,And bring the boy of life austereA voluntary captive here.'
He ended; and the king agreed,
   By the priest's counsel won.And all the ministers took heed   To see his bidding done.In ships with wondrous art preparedAway the lovely women fared,And soon beneath the shade they stoodOf the wild, lonely, dreary wood.And there the leafy cot they found   Where dwelt the devotee,And looked with eager eyes around   The hermit's son to see.Still, of Vibhándak sore afraid,They hid behind the creepers' shade.But when by careful watch they knewThe elder saint was far from view,

With bolder steps they ventured nigh
To catch the youthful hermit's eye.Then all the damsels, blithe and gay,At various games began to play.They tossed the flying ball aboutWith dance and song and merry shout,And moved, their scented tresses boundWith wreaths, in mazy motion round.Some girls as if by love possessed,Sank to the earth in feigned unrest,Up starting quickly to pursueTheir intermitted game anew.It was a lovely sight to see   Those fair ones, as they played,While fragrant robes were floating free,And bracelets clashing in their glee   A pleasant tinkling made.The anklet's chime, the Koïl's  
1 cry
   With music filled the placeAs 'twere some city in the sky   Which heavenly minstrels grace.With each voluptuous art they stroveTo win the tenant of the grove,And with their graceful forms inspireHis modest soul with soft desire.With arch of brow, with beck and smile,With every passion-waking wile
p. 17

   Of glance and lotus hand,
With all enticements that exciteThe longing for unknown delight   Which boys in vain withstand.Forth came the hermit's son to viewThe wondrous sight to him so new,   And gazed in rapt surprise,For from his natal hour till thenOn woman or the sons of men   He ne'er had cast his eyes.He saw them with their waists so slim,With fairest shape and faultless limb,In variegated robes arrayed,And sweetly singing as they played.Near and more near the hermit drew,   And watched them at their game,And stronger still the impulse grew   To question whence they came.They marked the young ascetic gazeWith curious eye and wild amaze,And sweet the long-eyed damsels sang,And shrill their merry laughter rang,Then came they nearer to his side,And languishing with passion cried:'Whose son, O youth, and who art thou,Come suddenly to join us now?And why dost thou all lonely dwellIn the wild wood? We pray thee, tell,

We wish to know thee, gentle youth;
Come, tell us, if thou wilt, the truth.'
He gazed upon that sight he ne'er
Had seen before, of girls so fair,And out of love a longing roseHis sire and lineage to disclose:'My father,' thus he made reply,'Is Kas'yap's son, a saint most high,Vibhándak styled; from him I came,And Rishyaœring he calls my name,Our hermit cot is near this place:Come thither, O ye fair of face;There be it mine, with honour due,Ye gentle youths, to welcome you.'
They heard his speech, and gave consent,
And gladly to his cottage went.Vibhándak's son received them wellBeneath the shelter of his cellWith guest-gift, water for their feet,And woodland fruit and roots to eat,They smiled, and spoke sweet words like these,Delighted with his courtesies:'We too have goodly fruit in store,Grown on the trees that shade our door;Come, if thou wilt, kind Hermit, hasteThe produce of our grove to taste;And let, O good Ascetic, first

This holy water quench thy thirst.'
They spoke, and gave him comfits sweetPrepared ripe fruits to counterfeit;And many a dainty cake besideAnd luscious mead their stores supplied.The seeming fruits, in taste and look,The unsuspecting hermit took,For, strange to him, their form beguiledThe dweller in the lonely wild.Then round his neck fair arms were flung,And there the laughing damsels clung,And pressing nearer and more nearWith sweet lips whispered at his ear;While rounded limb and swelling breastThe youthful hermit softly pressed.The pleasing charm of that strange bowl,   The touch of a tender limb,Over his yielding spirit stole   And sweetly vanquished him.But vows, they said, must now be paid;   They bade the boy farewell,And, of the aged saint afraid,   Prepared to leave the dell.With ready guile they told him where   Their hermit dwelling lay:Then, lest the sire should find them there,   Sped by wild paths away.They fled and left him there alone   By longing love possessed;

And with a heart no more his own
   He roamed about distressed.The aged saint came home, to find   The hermit boy distraught,Revolving in his troubled mind   One solitary thought.'Why dost thou not, my son,' he cried,   'Thy due obeisance pay?Why do I see thee in the tide   Of whelming thought to-day?A devotee should never wear   A mien so sad and strange.Come, quickly, dearest child, declare   The reason of the change.'And Rishyas'ring, when questioned thus,   Made answer in this wise:'O sire, there came to visit us   Some men with lovely eyes.About my neck soft arms they wound   And kept me tightly heldTo tender breasts so soft and round,   That strangely heaved and swelled.They sing more sweetly as they dance   Than e'er I heard till now,And play with many a sidelong glance   And arching of the brow.''My son,' said he, 'thus giants roam   Where holy hermits are,And wander round their peaceful home

   Their rites austere to mar.
I charge thee, thou must never lay   Thy trust in them, dear boy:They seek thee only to betray,   And woo but to destroy.'Thus having warned him of his foes   That night at home he spent.And when the morrow's sun arose
p. 18
   Forth to the forest went.
But Rishyas'ring with eager pace
Sped forth and hurried to the placeWhere he those visitants had seenOf daintly waist and charming mien.When from afar they saw the sonOf Saint Vibhándak toward them run,To meet the hermit boy they hied,And hailed him with a smile, and cried:'O come, we pray, dear lord, beholdOur lovely home of which we toldDue honour there to thee we'll pay,And speed thee on thy homeward way.'Pleased with the gracious words they saidHe followed where the damsels led.As with his guides his steps he bent,   That Bráhman high of worth,

A flood of rain from heaven was sent
   That gladdened all the earth.
Vibhándak took his homeward road,
And wearied by the heavy loadOf roots and woodland fruit he boreEntered at last his cottage door.Fain for his son he looked around,But desolate the cell he found.He stayed not then to bathe his feet,Though fainting with the toil and heat,But hurried forth and roamed aboutCalling the boy with cry and shout,He searched the wood, but all in vain;Nor tidings of his son could gain.
One day beyond the forest's bound
The wandering saint a village found,And asked the swains and neatherds thereWho owned the land so rich and fair,With all the hamlets of the plain,And herds of kine and fields of grain.They listened to the hermit's words,And all the guardians of the herds,With suppliant hands together pressed,This answer to the saint addressed:The Angas' lord who bears the nameOf Lomapád, renowned by fame,Bestowed these hamlets with their kine

And all their riches, as a sign
Of grace, on Rishyas'ring: and heVibhándak's son is said to be.'The hermit with exulting breastThe mighty will of fate confessed,By meditation's eye discerned;And cheerful to his home returned.
A stately ship, at early morn,
The hermit's son away had borne.Loud roared the clouds, as on he sped,The sky grew blacker overhead;Till, as he reached the royal town,A mighty flood of rain came down.By the great rain the monarch's mindThe coming of his guest divined.To meet the honoured youth he went,And low to earth his head he bent.With his own priest to lead the train,He gave the gift high guests obtain.And sought, with all who dwelt withinThe city walls, his grace to win.He fed him with the daintiest fare,He served him with unceasing care,And ministered with anxious eyesLest anger in his breast should rise;And gave to be the Bráhman's brideHis own fair daughter, lotus-eyed.

Thus loved and honoured by the king,
The glorious Bráhman Rishyas'ringPassed in that royal town his lifeWith S'ántá his beloved wife.'
Footnotes
16:1 The Koïl or kokila (Cuculus Indicus) as the 
harbinger of spring and love is a universal favourite 
with Indian poets. His voice when first heard in a glorious spring morning is not unpleasant, but becomes in the hot season intolerably wearisome to European ears.
Next: Canto X.: Rishyas'ring Invited.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO X.: RISHYAS'RING INVITED.
'Again, O best of kings, give ear:
My saving words attentive hear,And listen to the tale of oldBy that illustrious Bráhman told,'Of famed Ikshváku's line shall spring('Twas thus he spoke) a pious king,Named Das'aratha, good and great,True to his word and fortunate.He with the Angas' mighty lordShall ever live in sweet accord,And his a daughter fair shall be,S'ántá of happy destiny.But Lomapád, the Angas' chief,Still pining in his childless grief,To Das'aratha thus shall say:'Give me thy daughter, friend, I pray,Thy S'ántá of the tranquil mind,The noblest one of womankind.'
The father, swift to feel for woe,
Shall on his friend his child bestow;And he shall take her and departTo his own town with joyous heart.The maiden home in triumph led,

To Rishyas'ring the king shall wed.
And he with loving joy and prideShall take her for his honoured bride.And Das'aratha to a riteThat best of Bráhmans shall inviteWith supplicating prayer,To celebrate the sacrificeTo win him sons and Paradise,  
1
That he will fain prepare.
p. 19
From him the lord of men at length   The boon he seeks shall gain,And see four sons of boundless strength   His royal line maintain.''Thus did the godlike saint of old   The will of fate declare,And all that should befall unfold   Amid the sages there.O Prince supreme of men, go thou,   Consult thy holy guide,And win, to aid thee in thy vow,   This Bráhman to thy side.'Sumantra's counsel, wise and good,   King Das'aratha heard,Then by Vas'ishtha's side he stood   And thus with him conferred:'Sumantra counsels thus: do thou

My priestly guide, the plan allow.'
   Vas'ishtha gave his glad consent,And forth the happy monarch wentWith lords and servants on the roadThat led to Rishyas'ring's abode.Forests and rivers duly past,He reached the distant town at lastOf Lomapád the Angas' king,And entered it with welcoming.On through the crowded streets he came,And, radiant as the kindled flame,He saw within the monarch's houseThe hermit's son most glorious.There Lomapád, with joyful breast,   To him all honour paid,For friendship for his royal guest   His faithful bosom swayed.Thus entertained with utmost careSeven days, or eight, he tarried there,And then that best men thus brokeHis purpose to the king, and spoke:'O King of men, mine ancient friend,   (Thus Das'aratha prayed)Thy S'antá with her husband send   My sacrifice to aid.Said he who ruled the Angas, Yea,   And his consent was won:And then at once he turned away   To warn the hermit's son.

He told him of their ties beyond
Their old affection's faithful bond:'This king,' he said, 'from days of oldA well beloved friend I hold.To me this pearl of dames he gaveFrom childless woe mine age to save,The daughter whom he loved so much,Moved by compassion's gentle touch.In him thy S'antá's father see:As I am even so is he.For sons the childless monarch yearns:To thee alone for help he turns.Go thou, the sacred rite ordainTo win the sons he prays to gain:Go, with thy wife thy succour lend,And give his vows a blissful end.'   The hermit's son with quick accordObeyed the Angas' mighty lord,And with fair S'antá at his sideTo Das'aratha's city hied.Each king, with suppliant hands upheld,   Gazed on the other's face:And then by mutual love impelled   Met in a close embrace.Then Das'aratha's thoughtful care,   Before he parted thence,Bade trusty servants homeward bear   The glad intelligence:'Let all the town be bright and gay

   With burning incense sweet;
Let banners wave, and water lay   The dust in every street,'Glad were the citizens to learnThe tidings of their lord's return,And through the city every manObedienly his task began.And fair and bright Ayodhyá showed,As following his guest he rodeThrough the full streets where shell and drumProclaimed aloud the king was come.And all the people with delight   Kept gazing on their king,Attended by that youth so bright,   The glorious Rishyas'ring.When to his home the king had brought   The hermit's saintly son,He deemed that all his task was wrought,   And all he prayed for won.And lords who saw that stranger dame   So beautiful to view,Rejoiced within their hearts, and came   And paid her honour too.There Rishyasring passed blissful days,Graced like the king with love and praiseAnd shone in glorious light with her,Sweet S'ántá, for his minister,As Brahmá's son Vas'ishtha, heWho wedded Saint Arundhati. 
1

Footnotes
18:1 'Sons and Paradise are intimately connected in 
Indian belief. A man desires above every thing to have a 
son to perpetuate his race, and to assist with sacrifices and funeral rites to make him worthy to obtain a lofty seat in heaven or to preserve that which he has already obtained.' GORRESIO.
Next: Canto XI: The Sacrifice Decreed.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XI: THE SACRIFICE DECREED.
The Dewy Season  2 came and went;
   The spring returned again:
Then would the king, with mind intent,   His sacrifice ordain.
p. 20
He came to Rishyas'ring, and bowed   To him of look divine,And bade him aid his offering vowed   For heirs, to save his line.Nor would the youth his aid deny:   He spake the monarch fair,And prayed him for that rite so high   All requisites prepare.The king to wise Sumantra cried   Who stood aye ready near;'Go summon quick each holy guide,   To counsel and to hear.'Obedient to his lord's behest   Away Sumantra sped,And brought Vas'ishtha and the rest,In Scripture deeply read.Suyajna, Vámadeva came,

   Jávali, Kas'yap's son,
And old Vas'ishtha, dear to fame,   Obedient every one.King Das'aratha met them there   And duly honoured each,And spoke in pleasant words his fair   And salutary speech:'In childless longing doomed to pine,No happiness, O lords, is mine.So have I for this cause decreedTo slay the sacrificial steed.Fain would I pay that offering highWherein the horse is doomed to die,With Rishyas'ring his aid to lend,And with your glory to befriend.'
With loud applause each holy man
Received his speech, approved the plan,And, by the wise Vas'ishtha led,Gave praises to the king, and said:'The sons thou cravest shalt thou see,Of fairest glory, born to thee,Whose holy feelings bid thee takeThis righteous course for offspring's sake.'Cheered by the ready praise of thoseWhose aid he sought, his spirits rose,And thus the king his speech renewedWith looks of joy and gratitude:'Let what the coming rites require

Be ready as the priests desire,
And let the horse, ordained to bleed,With fitting guard and priest, be freed,  
1
Yonder on Sarjú's northern sideThe sacrificial ground provide;And let the saving rites, that naughtIll-omened may occur, be wrought.The offering I announce to-dayEach lord of earth may claim to pay,Provided that his care can guard
the holy rite by flaws unmarred.
For wandering fiends, whose watchful spiteWaits eagerly to spoil each rite,Hunting with keenest eye detectThe slightest slip, the least neglect;And when the sacred work is crossedThe workman is that moment lost.Let preparation due be made:   Your powers the charge can meet:That so the noble rite be paid   In every point complete.'And all the Bráhmans answered, Yea,   His mandate honouring,And gladly promised to obey   The order of the king.They cried with voices raised aloud:   'Success attend thine aim!'Then bade farewell, and lowly bowed,

   And hastened whence they came.
King Das'aratha went within,   His well loved wives to see:And said: 'Your lustral rites begin,   For these shall prosper me.A glorious offering I prepareThat precious fruit of sons may bear.'Their lily faces brightened fastThose pleasant words to hear,As lilies, when the winter's past,In lovelier hues appear.
Footnotes
19:1 One of the Pleiades and generally regarded as the 
model of wifely excellence.
19:2 The Hindu year is divided into six seasons of two months each, spring, summer, rains, autumn, winter, 
and dews.
20:1 It was essential that the horse should wander free 
for a year before immolation as a sign that his masters 
paramount sovereignty was acknowledged by all neighbouring princes.

Next: Canto XII.: The Sacrifice Begun.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XII.: THE SACRIFICE BEGUN.
Again the spring with genial heat
Returning made the year complete.To win him sons, without delayHis vow the king resolved to pay:And to Vas'ishtha, saintly man,In modest words this speech began:'Prepare the rite with all things fitAs is ordained in Holy Writ,And keep with utmost care afarWhate'er its sacred forms might mar.Thou art, my lord, my trustiest guide,Kind-hearted, and my friend beside;So is it meet thou undertakeThis heavy task for duty's sake.'
Then he, of twice-born men the best,
His glad assent at once expressed:'Fain will I do whate'er may beDesired, O honoured King, by thee.'To ancient priests he spoke, who, trainedIn holy rites, deep skill had gained:'Here guards be stationed, good and sageReligious men of trusted age.And various workmen send and call,

Who frame the door and build the wall:
With men of every art and trade,Who read the stars and ply the spade,
p. 21
And mimes and minstrels hither bring,And damsels trained to dance and sing.'
Then to the learned men he said,
In many a page of Scripture read:'Be yours each rite performed to seeAccording to the king's decree.And stranger Bráhmans quickly callTo this great rite that welcomes all.Pavilions for the princes, deckedWith art and ornament, erect,And handsome booths by thousands madeThe Bráhman visitors to shade,Arranged in order side by side,With meat and drink and all supplied.And ample stables we shall needFor many an elephant and steed:And chambers where the men may lie,And vast apartments, broad and high,Fit to receive the countless bandsOf warriors come from distant lands.For our own people too provideSufficient tents, extended wide,

And stores of meat and drink prepare,
And all that can be needed there.And food in plenty must be foundFor guests from all the country round.Of various viands presents make,For honour, not for pity's sake,That fit regard and worship bePaid to each caste in due degree.And let not wish or wrath exciteYour hearts the meanest guest to slight;But still observe with special graceThose who obtain the foremost place,Whether for happier skill in artOr bearing in the rite their part.Do you, I pray, with friendly mindPerform the task to you assigned,And work the rite, as bids the law,Without omission, slip, or flaw'
They answered: 'As thou seest fit
So will we do and naught omit.'The sage Vas'ishtha then addressedSumantra called at his behest:'The princes of the earth invite,And famous lords who guard the rite,Priest, Warrior, Merchant, lowly thrall,In countless thousands summon all.Where'er their home be, far or near,Gather the good with honour here,

And Janak, whose imperial sway
The men of Míthilá  1 obey.
The firm of vow, the dread of foes,Who all the lore of Scripture knows,
Invite him here with honour high,
King Das'aratha's old ally.And Kás'i's  
1b lord of gentle speech,
Who finds a pleasant word for each,In length of days our monarch's peer,Illustrious king, invite him here.The father of our ruler's bride,Known for his virtues far and wide,The king whom Kekaya's  
2b realms obey,
Him with his son invite, I pray.And Lomapád the Angas' king,True to his vows and godlike, bring.For be thine invitations sentTo west and south and orient.Call those who rule Suráshtra's  
3b land,
Suvíra's  4b realm and Sindhu's strand,
And all the kings of earth besideIn friendship's bonds with us allied:Invite them all to hasten inWith retinue and kith and kin.'
Vas'ishtha's speech without delay
Sumantra bent him to obey.And sent his trusty envoys forth

Eastward and westward, south and north.
Obedient to the saint's requestHimself he hurried forth, and pressedEach nobler chief and lord and kingTo hasten to the gathering.Before the saint Vas'ishtha stoodAll those who wrought with stone and wood,And showed the work which every oneIn furtherance of the rite had done,Rejoiced their ready zeal to see,Thus to the craftsmen all said he:'I charge ye, masters, see to this,That there be nothing done amiss,And this, I pray, in mind be borne,That not one gift ye give in scorn:Whenever scorn a gift attendsGreat sin is his who thus offends.'
And now some days and nights had past,
And kings began to gather fast,And precious gems in liberal storeAs gifts to Das'aratha bore.Then joy thrilled through Vas'ishtha's breastAs thus the monarch he addressed:'Obedient to thy high decreeThe kings, my lord, are come to thee.
p. 22

And it has been my care to greet
And honour all with reverence meet.Thy servants' task is ended quite,And all is ready for the rite.Come forth then to the sacred groundWhere all in order will be found.'Then Rishyas'ring confirmed the tale:Nor did their words to move him fail.The stars propitious influence lentWhen forth the world's great ruler went.
Then by the sage Vas'ishtha led
   The priest begun to speedThose glorious rites wherein is shed   The lifeblood of the steed.
Footnotes
21:1 Called also Vidcha, later Tirabhukti, corrupted into 
the modern Tirhut, a province bounded on the west and 
east by the Gaudakí and Kaus'ikí rivers, on the south by the Ganges, and on the north by the skirts of the Himálayas.
21:1b The celebrated city of Benares. See Dr. Hall's 
learned and exhaustive Monograph in the Sacred City of 

the Hindus, by the Rev. M. A. Sherring.
21:2b Kekaya is supposed to have been in the Panjáb. 
The name of the king was As'vapati (Lord of Horses), 
father of Das'aratha's wife Kaikeyi.
21:3b Surat.
21:4b Apparently in the west of India not far from the 
Indus.
Next: Canto XIII.: The Sacrifice Finished.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIII.: THE SACRIFICE FINISHED.
The circling year had filled its course,
And back was brought the wandering horse:Then upon Sarjú's northern strandBegan the rite the king had planned.With Rishyas'ring the forms to guide,The Bráhmans to their task applied,At that great offering of the steedTheir lofty-minded king decreed.The priests, who all the Scripture knew,Performed their part in order due,And circled round in solemn trainAs precepts of the law ordain.Pravargya rites  
1 were duly sped:
For Upusads  2 the flames were fed.
Then from the plant  3 the juice was squeezed,
And those high saints with minds well pleasedPerformed the mystic rites begunWith bathing ere the rise of sun.They gave the portion Indra's claim,
And hymned the King whom none can blame.
The mid-day bathing followed next,Observed as bids the holy text.

Then the good priests with utmost care,
In form that Scripture's rules declare,For the third time pure water shedOn high souled Das'aratha's head.Then Rishyas'ring and all the restTo Indra and the Gods addressedTheir sweet-toned hymn of praise and prayer,And called them in the rite to share.With sweetest song and hymn intonedThey give the Gods in heaven enthroned,As duty bids, the gifts they claim,The holy oil that feeds the flame.And many an offering there was paid,And not one slip in all was made,For with most careful heed they sawThat all was done by Veda law.None, all those days, was seen oppressedBy hunger or by toil distressed.Why speak of human kind? No beastWas there that lacked an ample feast.For there was store for all who came,For orphan child and lonely dame;The old and young were well supplied,The poor and hungry satisfied.Throughout the day ascetics fed,And those who roam to beg their bread:While all around the cry was still,'Give forth, give forth,' and ' Eat your fill.''Give forth with liberal hand the meal,

And various robes in largess deal.'
Urged by these cries on every sideUnweariedly their task they plied:And heaps of food like hills in sizeIn boundless plenty met the eyes:And lakes of sauce, each day renewed,Refreshed the weary multitude.And strangers there from distant lands,And women folk in crowded bandsThe best of food and drink obtainedAt the great rite the king ordained.Apart from all, the Bráhmans there,Thousands on thousands, took their shareOf various dainties sweet to taste,On plates of gold and silver placed,All ready set, as, when they willed,The twice-born men their places filled.And servants in fair garments dressedWaited upon each Bráhman guest.Of cheerful mind and mien were they,With gold and jewelled earrings gay.The best of Bráhmans praised the fareOf countless sorts, of flavour rare:And thus to Raghu's son they cried:'We bless thee, and are satisfied.'Between the rites some Bráhmans spentThe time in learned argument,
p. 23

With ready flow of speech, sedate,
And keen to vanquish in debate.  1
There day by day the holy trainPerformed all rites as rules ordain.No priest in all that host was foundBut kept the vows that held him bound:None, but the holy Vedas knew,And all their six-fold science  
2 too.
No Bráhman there was found unfitTo speak with eloquence and wit.
And now the appointed time came near
The sacrificial posts to rear.They brought them, and prepared to fixOf Bel  
3 and Khádir  4 six and six;
Six, made of the Palás'a  5 tree,
Of Fig-wood one, apart to be:Of Sleshmát  
6 and of Devadár  7
One column each, the mightiest far:So thick the two, the arms of manTheir ample girth would fail to span.All these with utmost care were wroughtBy hand of priests in Scripture taught,And all with gold were gilded brightTo add new splendour to the rite:
Twenty-and-one those stakes in all,

Each one-and-twenty cubits tall:
And one-and-twenty ribbons thereHung on the pillars, bright and fair.Firm in the earth they stood at last,Where cunning craftsmen fixed them fast;And there unshaken each remained,Octagonal and smoothly planed.Then ribbons over all were hung,And flowers and scent around them flung.Thus decked they cast a glory forthLike the great saints who star the north.  
1b
The sacrificial altar thenWas raised by skilful twice-born men,In shape and figure to beholdAn eagle with his wings of gold,With twice nine pits and formed three-foldEach for some special God, besideThe pillars were the victims tied;The birds that roam the wood, the air,The water, and the land were there,And snakes and things of reptile birth,And healing herbs that spring from earth;As texts prescribe, in Scripture found,Three hundred victims there were bound.The steed devoted to the hostOf Gods, the gem they honour most,Was duly sprinkled. Then the QueenKaus'alyá, with delighted mien,With reverent steps around him paced.

And with sweet wreaths the victim graced;
Then with three swords in order dueShe smote the steed with joy, and slew.That night the queen, a son to gain,With calm and steady heart was fainBy the dead charger's side to stayFrom evening till the break of day.Then came three priests, their care to leadThe other queens to touch the steed,Upon Kaus'alyá to attend,Their company and aid to lend.As by the horse she still reclined,With happy mien and cheerful mind,With Rishyas'ring the twice-born cameAnd praised and blessed the royal dame.The priest who well his duty knew,And every sense could well subdue,From out the bony chambers freedAnd boiled the marrow of the steed.Above the steam the monarch bent,And, as he smelt the fragrant scent,In time and order drove afarAll error that his hopes could mar.Then sixteen priests together cameAnd cast into the sacred flameThe severed members of the horse,Made ready all in ordered course.On piles of holy Fig-tree raised

p. 24
The meaner victims' bodies blazed:
The steed, of all the creatures slain,Alone required a pile of cane.Three days, as is by law decreed,Lasted that Offering of the Steed.The Chatushtom began the rite,And when the sun renewed his light,The Ukthya followed: after cameThe Atirátra's holy flame.These were the rites, and many moreArranged by light of holy lore,The Aptoryám of mighty power,And, each performed in proper hour,The Abhijit and Vis'vajitWith every form and service fit;And with the sacrifice at nightThe Jyotishtom and Áyus rite.  
1
The task was done, as laws prescribe:The monarch, glory of his tribe,Bestowed the land in liberal grantsUpon the sacred ministrants.He gave the region of the east,His conquest, to the Hotri priest.The west, the celebrant obtained:The south, the priest presiding gained:The northern region was the share

Of him who chanted forth the prayer,  1b
Thus did each priest obtain his meed
At the great Slaughter of the Steed,Ordained, the best of all to be,By self-existent deity.Ikshváku's son with joyful mindThis noble fee to each assigned,But all the priests with one accordAddressed that unpolluted lord:'Tis thine alone to keep the wholeOf this broad earth in firm control.
p. 25
No gift of lands from thee we seek:To guard these realms our hands were weak.On sacred lore our days are spent:Let other gifts our wants content.'The chief of old Ikshváku's lineGave them ten hundred thousand kine,A hundred millions of fine gold,The same in silver four times told.But every priest in presence thereWith one accord resigned his share.To Saint Vas'ishtha, high of soul,And Rishyas'ring they gave the whole.That largess pleased those Brahmans well,Who bade the prince his wishes tell.Then Das'aratha, mighty king.

Made answer thus to Rishyas'ring:
'O holy Hermit, of thy grace,Vouchsafe the increase of my race.'He spoke; nor was his prayer denied:The best of Bráhmans thus replied:'Four sons, O Monarch, shall be thine,Upholders of thy royal line.'
Footnotes
22:1 'The Pravargya ceremony lasts for three days, and 
is always performed twice a day, in the forenoon and 
afternoon. It precedes the animal and Soma sacrifices. For without having undergone it no one is allowed to take part in the solemn Soma feast prepared for the gods.' HAUG's Aitareya Bráhmanam. Ved. II. p. 41. note,. q. v.
22:2 Upasads. 'The Gods said, Let us perform the burnt 
offerings called Upasads (i. e. besieging). For by means 
of an Upasad, i. e. besieging, they conquer a large (fortified) town.' --Ibid. p. 32.
22:3 The Soma plant, or Asclepias Acida. lts fermented 
juice was drunk in sacrifice by the priests and offered to 
the Gods who enjoyed the intoxicating draught.

23:1 'Dum* in caerimoniarum intervallis Brachmanae 
facundi, sollertes, crebros sermones de rerum causis 
instituebant, alter alterum vincendi cupidi. This public disputation in the assembly of Bráhmans on the nature of things, and the almost fraternal connexion between theology and philosophy deserves some notice; whereas the priests of some religions are generally but little inclined to show favour to philosophers, nay, sometimes persecute them with the most rancorous hatred, as we are taught both by history and experience.... This s'loka is found in the MSS. of different recensions of the Rámáyan, and we have, therefore, the most trustworthy testimony to the antiquity of philosophy among the Indians.' SCHLEGEL.
23:2 The Angas or appendices of the Vedas, 
pronunciation, prosody, grammar, ritual, astronomy, 
and explanation of obscurities.
23:3 In Sanskrit vilva, the Aegle Marmelos. 'He who 
desires food and wishes to grow fat, ought to make his 
Yúpa (sacrificial Post) of Bilva wood.' HAUG'S Aítareya Bráhmanam. Vol. II. p. 73.
23:4 The Mimosa Catechu. ' He who desires heaven 
ought to make his Yúpa of Khádira wood.' --Ibid.

23:5 The Butea Frondosa. 'He who desires beauty and 
sacred knowledge ought to make his Yúpa of Palás'a 
wood.' --lbid.
23:6 The Cardia Latifolia.
23:7 A kind of pine. The word means literally the tree 
of the Gods; Compare the ••• •••• 'trees of the Lord.'
23:1b The Hindus call the constellation of Ursa Major the Seven Rishis or Saints.
24:1 A minute account of these ancient ceremonies would be out of place here. 'Ágnishtoma is the name of 
a sacrifice, or rather a series of offerings to fire for five days. It is the first and principal part of the Jyotishtoma, one of the great sacrifices in which especially the juice of the Soma plant is offered for the purpose of obtaining Swarga or heaven.' GOLDSTÜCKER'S DICTIONARY. 'The Ágnishtoma is Agni. It is called so because they (the gods) praised him with this Stoma. They called it so to hide the proper meaning of the word: for the gods like to hide the proper meaning of words.' 
'On account of four classes of gods having praised Agni 
with four Stomas, the whole was called Chatushtoma (containing four Stomas).' 

'It (the Ágnishtoma) is called Jyotishtoma, for they 
praised Agni when he had risen up (to the sky) in the shape of a light (jyotis).' 
'This (Ágnishtoma) is a sacrificial performance which 
has no beginning and no end.' HAUG'S Aitareya Bráhmanam. 
The Atirátra, literally lasting through the night, is a 
division of the service of the Jyotishtoma. 
The Abhijit, the everywhere victorious, is the name of a 
sub-division of the great sacrifice of the Gavámanaya. 
The Vis'vajit, or the all-conquering, is a similar sub-
division. 
Áyus is the name of a service forming a division of the 
Abhiplava sacrifice. 
'The Aptoryám, is the seventh or last part of the 
Jyotishtoma, for the performance of which it is not essentially necessary, but a voluntary sacrifice instituted for the attainment of a specific desire. The literal meaning of the word would be in conformity with the Praudhamanoramá, a sacrifice which procures the attainment of the desired object. GOLDSTÜCKER'S 

DICTIONARY. 
'The Ukthya is a slight modification of the Agnishtoma 
sacrifice. The noun to be supplied to it is kratu. It is a Soma sacrifice also, and one of the seven Sansthas or component parts of the Jyotishtoma. Its name indicates its nature. For Ukthya means "what refers to the Uktha," which is an older name for Shástra, i.e. recitation of one of the Hotri priests at the time of the Soma libations. Thus this sacrifice is only a kind of supplement to the Agnishtoma.' HAUG.
24:1b 'Four classes of priests were required in India at 
the most solemn sacrifices. 1. The officiating priests, 
manual labourers, and acolytes, who had chiefly to prepare the sacrificial ground, to dress the altar, slay the victims, and pour out the libations. 2. The choristers, who chant the sacred hymns. 3. The reciters or readers, who repeat certain hymns. 4. The overseers or bishops, who watch and superintend the proceedings of the other priests, and ought to be familiar with all the Vedas. The formulas and verses to be muttered by the first class are contained in the Yajur-veda-sanhitá. The hymns to be sung by the second class are in the Sama-veda-sanhitá. The Atharva-veda in said to be intended for the Brahman or overseer, who is to watch the proceedings of the sacrifice, and to remedy any mistake that may occur. The hymns to he recited by the third class are contained in the Rigveds,' Chips from a German 

Workshop.
Next: Canto XIV.: Rávan Doomed.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIV.: RÁVAN DOOMED.
The saint, well read in holy lore,
Pondered awhile his answer o'er.And thus again addressed the king,His wandering thoughts regathering:'Another rite will I beginWhich shall the sons thou cravest win,Where all things shall be duly spedAnd first Atharva texts be read.'
Then by Vibhándak's gentle son
Was that high sacrifice begun,The king's advantage seeking stillAnd zealous to perform his will.Now all the Gods had gathered there,Each one for his allotted share:Brahmá, the ruler of the sky,Sthanu, Náráyan, Lord most highAnd holy Indra men might viewWith Maruts  
1 for his retinue;
The heavenly chorister, and saint,And spirit pure from earthly taint,With one accord had sought the placeThe high-souled monarch's rite to grace.

Then to the Gods who came to take
Their proper share the hermit spake:'For you has Das'aratha slainThe votive steed, a son to gain;Stern penance-rites the king has tried,And in firm faith on you relied,
And now with undiminished care
A second rite would fain prepare.But, O ye Gods, consent to grantThe longing of your supplicant.For him beseeching hands I lift,And pray you all to grant the gift,That four fair sons of high renownThe offerings of the king may crown.'They to the hermit's son replied:'His longing shall be gratified.For, Bráhman, in most high degreeWe love the king and honour thee.'
These words the Gods in answer said,
And vanished thence by Indra led.Thus to the Lord, the worlds who made,The Immortals all assembled prayed:'O Brahmá, mighty by thy grace,Rávan, who rules the giant race,Torments us in his senseless pride,And penance-loving saints beside.For thou well pleased in days of old

Gavest the boon that makes him bold,
That God nor demon e'er should killHis charmed life, for so thy will.We, honouring that high behest,Bear all his rage though sore distressed.That lord of giants fierce and fellScourges the earth and heaven and hell.Mad with thy boon, his impious rageSmites saint and bard and God and sage.The sun himself withholds his glow.The wind in fear forbears to blow;The fire restrains his wonted heatWhere stand the dreaded Rávan's feet,And, necklaced with the wandering ware,The sea before him fears to rave.Kuvera's self in sad defeatIs driven from his blissful seat.We see, we feel the giant's might.And woe comes o'er us and affright.Tc thee, O Lord, thy suppliants prayTo find some cure this plague to stay.'
Thus by the gathered Gods addressed
He pondered in his secret breast,And said: 'One only way I findTo slay this fiend of evil mind.He prayed me once his life to guardFrom demon, God, and heavenly bard,And spirits of the earth and air,

And I consenting heard his prayer.
But the proud giant in Inn scornRecked not of man of woman born.None else may take his life away,But only man the fiend may slay.'The Gods, with Indra at their head,Rejoiced to hear the words he said.Then crowned with glory like a flame,Lord Vishnu to the council came;His hands shell, mace, and discus bore,Aud saffron were the robes he wore.
p. 26
Riding his eagle through the crowd,As the sun rides upon a cloud,With bracelets of fine gold, he cameLoud welcomed by the Gods' acclaim.His praise they sang with one consent,And cried, in lowly reverence bent:'O Lord whose hand fierce Madhu 
1 slew,
Be thou our refuge, firm and true;Friend of the suffering worlds art thou,We pray thee help thy suppliants now.'Then Vishnu spake: 'Ye Gods, declare,What may I do to grant your prayer?'
'King Das'aratha,' thus cried they,
'Fervent in penance many a day,

The sacrificial steed has slain,
Longing for sons, but all in vain.Now, at the cry of us forlorn,Incarnate as his seed be born.Three queens has he: each lovely dameLike Beauty, Modesty, or Fame.Divide thyself in four, and beHis offspring by these noble three.Man's nature take, and slay in fightRávan who laughs at heavenly might:This common scourge, this rankling thornWhom the three worlds too long have borne.For Rávan in the senseless prideOf might unequalled has defiedThe host of heaven, and plagues with woeAngel and bard and saint below,Crushing each spirit and each maidWho plays in Nandan's 
2 heavenly shade.
O conquering Lord, to thee we bow;Our surest hope and trust art thou.Regard the world of men below,And slay the Gods' tremendous foe.'
When thus the suppliant Gods had prayed,
His wise reply Nárayan 
3 made:
'What task demands my presence there,And whence this dread, ye Gods declare.'
The Gods replied: 'We fear, O Lord,

Fierce Rávan, ravener abhorred.
Be thine the glorious task, we pray,In human form this fiend to slay.By thee of all the Blest aloneThis sinner may be overthrown.He gained by penance long and direThe favour of the mighty Sire.Then He who every gift bestows
Guarded the fiend from heavenly foes,
And gave a pledge his life that keptFrom all things living, man except.On him thus armed no other foeThan man may deal the deadly blow.Assume, O King, a mortal birth,And strike the demon to the earth.'
Then Vishnu, God of Gods, the Lord
Supreme by all the worlds adored,To Brahmá and the suppliants spake:'Dismiss your fear: for your dear sakeIn battle will I smite him dead,The cruel fiend, the Immortal's dread,And lords and ministers and allHis kith and kin with him shall fall.Then, in the world of mortal men,Ten thousand years and hundreds tenI as a human king will reign,And guard the earth as my domain.'

God, saint, aud nymph, and ministrel throng
With heavenly voices raised their songIn hymns of triumph to the GodWhose conquering feet on Madhu trod:   'Champion of Gods, as man appear,     This cruel Rávan slay,   The thorn that saints and hermits fear,     The plague that none can stay.   In savage fury uncontrolled     His pride for ever grows:   He dares the Lord of Gods to hold     Among his deadly foes.'
Footnotes
25:1 The Maruts are the winds, deified in we religion of 
the Veda like other mighty Powers and phenomena of 
nature.
26:1 A Titan or fiend whose destruction has given 
Vishnu one of his well-known titles, Mádhava.
26:2 The garden of Indra.
26:3 One of the most ancient and popular of the 

numerous names of Vishnu. The word has been derived 
in several ways, and may mean he who moved on the (primordial) waters, or he who pervades or influences men or their thoughts.
Next: Canto XV.: The Nectar.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XV.: THE NECTAR.
When wisest Vishnu thus had given
His promise to the Gods of heaven,He pondered in his secret mindA suited place of birth to find,Then he decreed, the lotus-eyed,In four his being to divide,And Das'aratha, gracious king.He chose as sire from whom to spring.That childless prince of high renown,Who smote in war his foemen down,At that same time with utmost carePrepared the rite that wins an heir. 
1b
Then Vishnu, fain on earth to dwell,Bade the Almighty Sire farewell,And vanished while a reverent crowdOf Gods and saints in worship bowed.
The monarch watched the sacred rite,
When a vast form of awful might,Of matchless splendour, strength, and sizeWas manifest before his eyes.
p. 27

From forth the sacrificial flame,
Dark, robed in red, the being came.His voice was drumlike, loud and low,His face suffused with rosy glow.Like a huge lion's mane appearedThe long locks of his hair and beard.He shone with many a lucky sign,And many an ornament divine;A towering mountain in his height,A tiger in his gait and might.No precious mine more rich could be,No burning flame more bright than he.His arms embraced in loving hold,Like a dear wife, a vase of goldWhose silver lining held a draughtOf nectar as in heaven is quaffed:A vase so vast, so bright to view,They scarce could count the vision true.Upon the king his eyes he bent,And said: 'The Lord of life has sentHis servant down, O Prince, to beA messenger from heaven to thee.'The king with all his nobles byRaised reverent hands and made reply:'Welcome, O glorious being! SayHow can my care thy grace repay.'Envoy of Him whom all adoreThus to the king he spake once more:'The Gods accept thy worship: they

Give thee the blessed fruit to-day.
Approach and take, O glorious King,This heavenly nectar which I bring,For it shall give thee sons and wealth,And bless thee with a store of health.Give it to those fair queens of thine,And bid them quaff the drink divine:And they the princely suns shall bearLong sought by sacrifice and prayer.'
' Yea. O my lord,' the monarch said,
And took the vase upon his head,The gift of Gods, of fine gold wrought,With store of heavenly liquor fraught.He honoured, filled with transport new,That wondrous being, fair to view,As round the envoy of the GodWith reverential steps he trod. 
1
His errand done, that form of lightArose and vanished from the sight.High rapture filled the monarch's soul,Possessed of that celestial bowl,As when a man by want distressedWith unexpected wealth is blest.And rays of transport seemed to fallIlluminating bower and hall,As when the autumn moon rides high,And floods with lovely light the sky.

Quick to the ladies' bower he sped,
And thus to Queen Kaus'alyá said:'This genial nectar take and quaff,'He spoke, and gave the lady half.Part of the nectar that remainedSumitrá from his hand obtained.He gave, to make her fruitful too,Kaikeyí half the residue.A portion yet remaining there,   He paused awhile to think.Then gave Sumitrá, with her share.   The remnant of the drink.Thus on each queen of those fair three   A part the king bestowed,And with sweet hope a child to see   Their yearning bosoms glowed.The heavenly bowl the king supplied   Their longing souls relieved,And soon, with rapture and with pride,   Each royal dame conceived.He gazed upon each lady's face,   And triumphed as he gazed,As Indra in his royal place   By Gods and spirits praised.
Footnotes

26:1b The Horse-Sacrifice, just described.
27:1 To walk round an object keeping the right side 
towards it is a mark of great respect. The Sanskrit word 
for the observance is pradakshiná, from pra pro, and 
daksha right, Greek δεξ•ος, Latin dexter, Gaelic *deas-
il. A similar ceremony is observed by tha Gaels. 
'In the meantime she traced around him, with wavering 
steps, the propitiation, which some have thought has been derived from the Druidical mythology. It consists, as is well known, in the person who wakes the deasil walking three times round the person who is the object of the ceremony, taking care to move according to the course of the sun.' SCOTT. The Two Drovers.
Next: Canto XVI.: The Vánars.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVI.: THE VÁNARS.
When Vishnu thus had gone on earth.
From the great king to take his birth.The self-existent Lord of allAddressed the Gods who heard his call:'For Vishnu's sake, the strong and true.Who seeks the good of all of you,Make helps, in war to lend him aid,In forms that change at will, arrayed,Of wizard skill and hero might,Outstrippers of the wind in flight,Skilled in the arts of counsel, wise,And Vishnu's peers in bold emprise;With heavenly arts and prudence fraught,By no devices to be caught;Skilled in all weapon's lore and useAs they who drink the immortal juice. 
1b
p. 28
And let the nymphs supreme in grace,And maidens of the minstrel race,Monkeys and snakes,and those who roveFree spirits of the hill and grove,And wandering Daughters of the Air,

In monkey form brave children bear.
So erst the lord of bears I shaped,Born from my mouth as wide I gaped.'
Thus by the mighty Sire addressed
They all obeyed his high behest,And thus begot in countless swarmsBrave sons disguised in sylvan forms.Each God, each sage became a sire,Each minstrel of the heavenly quire, 
1
Each faun, 2 of children strong and good
Whose feet should roam the hill and wood.Snakes, bards, 
3 and spirits, 4 serpents bold
Had sons too numerous to be told.Báli, the woodland hosts who led,High as Mahendra's 
5 lofty head,
Was Indra's child. That noblest fire,The Sun, was great Sugríva's sire,Tára, the mighty monkey, heWas offspring of Vrihaspati: 
6
Tára the matchless chieftain, boastFor wisdom of the Vánar host.Of Gandhamádan brave and boldThe father was the Lord of Gold.Nala the mighty, dear to fame,Of skilful Vis'vakarmá 
7 came.
From Agni, 8 Nila bright as flame,
Who in his splendour, might, and worth,

Surpassed the sire who gave him birth.
The heavenly As'vlns, 1b swift and fair,
Were fathers of a noble pair,
Who, Dwivida and Mainda named,For beauty like their sires were famed,Varun 
2b was father of Sushen,
Of Sarabh, he who sends the rain, 3b
Hanúmán, best of monkey kind,Was son of him who breathes the wind:Like thunderbolt in frame was he,And swift as Garud's 
4b self could flee.
These thousands did the Gods createEndowed with might that none could mate,In monkey forms that changed at will;So strong their wish the fiend to kill.In mountain size, like lions thewed,Up sprang the wondrous multitude,Auxiliar hosts in every shape,Monkey and bear and highland ape.In each the strength, the might, the mienOf his own parent God were seen.Some chiefs of Vánar mothers came,Some of she-bear and minstrel dame,Skilled in all arms in battle's shock;The brandished tree, the loosened rock;And prompt, should other weapons fail,To fight and slay with tooth and nail.Their strength could shake the hills amain,

And rend the rooted trees in twain,
Disturb with their impetuous sweepThe Rivers' Lord, the Ocean deep,Rend with their feet the seated ground,And pass wide floods with airy bound,Or forcing through the sky their wayThe very clouds by force could stay.Mad elephants that wander throughThe forest wilds, could they subdue,And with their furious shout could scareDead upon earth the birds of air.So were the sylvan chieftains formed;Thousands on thousands still they swarmed.These were the leaders honoured most,The captains of the Vánar host,And to each lord and chief and guideWas monkey offspring born beside.Then by the bears' great monarch stoodThe other roamers of the wood,
p. 29
And turned, their pathless homes to seek,To forest and to mountain peak.The leaders of the monkey bandBy the two brothers took their stand,Sugríva, offspring of the Sun.And Báli, Indra's mighty one.They both endowed with Garud's might,

And skilled in all the arts of fight,
Wandered in arms the forest through,And lions, snakes, and tigers, slew.But every monkey, ape, and bearEver was Báli's special care;With his vast strength and mighty armHe kept them from all scathe and harm.And so the earth with hill, wood, seas,Was filled with mighty ones like these,Of various shape and race and kind,With proper homes to each assigned,With Ráma's champions fierce and strong   The earth was overspread,High as the hills and clouds, a throng   With bodies vast and dread. 
1
        * * * * *
Footnotes
27:1b The Amrit, the nectar of the Indian Gods.
28:1 Gandharvas (Southey's Glendoveers) are celestial 
musicians inhabiting Indra's heaven and forming the 
orchestra at all the banquets of the principal deities.

28:2 Yakshas, demigods attendant especially on Kuvera, 
and employed by him in the care of his garden and 
treasures.
28:3 Kimpurushas, demigods attached also to the 
service of Kuvera, celestial musicians, represented like 
centaurs reversed with human figures and horses' heads.
28:4 Siddhas, demigods or spirits of undefined 
attributes, occupying with the Vidyádharas the middle 
air or region between the earth and the sun. 
Schlegel translates: 'Divi, Sapientes, Fidicines, 
Praepetes, illustres Genii, Praeconesque procrearunt natos, masculos, silvicolas; angues porro, Hippocephali Beati, Aligeri, Serpentesque frequentes alacriter generavere prolem innumerabilem.'
28:5 A mountain in the south of India.
28:6 The preceptor of the Gods and regent of the planet 
Jupiter.
28:7 The celestial architect, the Indian Hephaestus, Mulciber, or Vulcan.
28:8 The God of Fire.

28:1b Twin children of the Sun, the physicians of 
Swarga or Indra's heaven.
28:2b The deity of the waters.
28:3b Parjanya, sometimes confounded with Indra.
28:4b The bird and vehicle of Visnu. He is generally represented as a being something between a man and a 
bird and considered as the sovereign of the feathered race. He may be compared with the Simurgh of the Persians, the 'Anká of the Arabs, the Griffin of chivalry, the Phoenix of Egypt, and the bird that sits upon the ash Yggdrasil of the Edda.
Next: Canto XVII.: Rishyas'ring's Return.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVII.: RISHYAS'RING'S RETURN.
Now when the high-souled monarch's rite,
The As'vamedh, was finished quite,Their sacrificial dues obtained,The Gods their heavenly homes regained.The lofty-minded saints withdrew,Each to his place, with honour due,And kings and chieftains, one and all,Who came to grace the festival.And Das'aratha, ere they went,Addressed them thus benevolent:'Now may you, each with joyful heart,To your own realms, O Kings, depart.Peace and good luck attend you there,And blessing, is my friendly prayer;Let cares of state each mind engageTo guard his royal heritage.A monarch from his throne expelledNo better than the dead is held.
So he who cares for power and might
Must guard his realm and royal right.Such care a meed in heaven will bringBetter than rites and offering.Such care a king his country owes

As man upon himself bestows,
When for his body he providesRaiment and every need besides.For future days should kings foresee,And keep the present error-free.
Thus did the king the kings exhort:
They heard, and turned them from the courtAnd, each to each in friendship bound,Went forth to all the realms around.The rites were o'er, the guests were sped:The train the best of Bráhmans led,In which the king with joyful soul,With his dear wives, and with the wholeOf his imperial host and trainOf cars and servants turned again,And, as a monarch dear to fame,Within his royal city came.
Next, Rishyas'ring, well-honoured sage,
And S'ántá, sought their hermitage.The king himself, of prudent mind,Attended him, with troops behind.And all her men the town outpouredWith Saint Vas'ishtha and their lord.High mounted on a car of state,O'ercanopied fair S'ántá sate,Drawn by white oxen, while a bandOf servants marched on either hand.

Great gifts of countless price she bore,
With sheep and goats and gems in shore.Like Beauty's self the lady shoneWith all the jewels she had on,As, happy in her sweet content.Peerless amid the fair she went.Not Queen Paulomí's  
1b self could be
More loving to her lord than she.She who had lived in happy ease,Honoured with all her heart could please,While dames and kinsfolk ever viedTo see her wishes gratified,Soon as she knew her husband's willAgain to seek the forest, stillWas ready for the hermit's cot,Nor murmured at her altered lot.The king attended to the wildThat hermit and his own dear child,And in the centre of a throngOf noble courtiers rode along.The sage's son had let prepareA lodge within the wood, and thereWhile they lingered blithe and gay.Then, duly honoured, went their way.The glorious hermit Rishyas'ringDrew near and thus besought the king:
p. 30

'Return, my honoured lord, I pray,
Return, upon thy homeward way.'The monarch, with the waiting crowd,Lifted his voice and wept aloud,And with eyes dripping still to eachOf his good queens he spake this speech:
'Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá dear,
And thou, my sweet Kaikeyí, hear.All upon S'ántá feast your gaze,The last time for a length of days.'To S'ántá's arms the ladies leapt,And hung about her neck and wept,And cried, '0, happy be the lifeOf this great Bráhman and his wife.The Wind, the Fire, the Moon on high.The Earth, the Streams, the circling sky,Preserve thee in the wood, true spouse,Devoted to thy husband's vows.And O dear S'ántá, ne'er neglectTo pay the dues of meek respectTo the great saint, thy husband's sire,With all observance and with fire.And, sweet one, pure of spot and blame,Forget not thou thy husband's claim;In every change, in good and ill,Let thy sweet words delight him still,And let thy worship constant be:Her lord is woman's deity.

To learn thy welfare, dearest friend,
The king will many a Bráhman send.Let happy thoughts thy spirit cheer.And be not troubled, daughter dear.'
These soothing words the ladies said.
And pressed their lips upon her head.Each gave with sighs her last adieu,Then at the king's command withdrew.The king around the hermit wentWith circling footsteps reverent,And placed at Rishyas'ring's commandSome soldiers of his royal band.The Bráhman bowed in turn and cried,'May fortune never leave thy side.O mighty King, with justice reign,And still thy people's love retain.'He spoke, and turned away his face,   And, as the hermit went,The monarch, rooted to the place,   Pursued with eyes intent.But when the sage had past from viewKing Das'aratha turned him too,Still fixing on his friend each thought.With such deep love his breast was fraught.Amid his people's loud acclaimHome to his royal seat he came,   And lived delighted there,Expecting when each queenly dame,

Upholder of his ancient fame,
   Her promised son should bear.The glorious sage his way pursuedTill close before his eyes he viewedSweet Champá, Lomapád's fair town,Wreathed with her Champacs' 
1 leafy crown.
Soon as the saint's approach he knew,The king, to yield him honour due,Went forth to meet him with a bandOf priests and nobles of the land:'Hail, Sage,' he cried, 'O joy to me!What bliss it is, my lord, to seeThee with thy wife and all thy trainReturning to my town again.Thy father, honoured Sage, is well,Who hither from his woodland cellHas sent full many a messengerFor tidings both of thee and her.'Then joyfully, for due respect,The monarch bade the town be decked.The king and Rishyas'ring elateEntered the royal city's gate:   In front the chaplain rode.Then, loved and honoured with all careBy monarch and by courtier, there   The glorious saint abode.

Footnotes
29:1 This Canto will appear ridiculous to the European 
reader. But it should be remembered that the monkeys 
of an Indian forest, the 'bough-deer' as the poets call them, are very different animals from the 'turpissima bestia' that accompanies the itinerant organ-grinder or grins in the Zoological Gardens of London. Milton has made his hero, Satan, assume the forms of a cormorant, a toad, and a serpent, and I cannot see that this creation of semi-divine Vánars, or monkeys, is more ridiculous or undignified.
29:1b The consort of Ladra, called also S'achí and 
Indrání.
Next: Canto XVIII.: Rishyas'ring's Departure.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVIII.: RISHYAS'RING'S 
DEPARTURE.
The monarch called a Bráhman near
   And said, 'Now speed awayTo Kas'yap's son,  
2 the mighty seer,
   And with all reverence sayThe holy child he holds so dear,The hermit of the noble mind.Whose equal it were hard to find,   Returned, is dwelling here.Go, and instead of me do thouBefore that best of hermits bow,That still he may, for his dear son,Show me the favour I have won.'Soon as the king these words had said,To Kas'yap's son the Bráhman sped.Before the hermit low he bentAnd did obeisance, reverent;Then with meek words his grace to craveThe message of his lord he gave:'The high-souled father of his brideHad called thy son his rites to guide:Those rites are o'er, the steed is slain;Thy noble child is come again.'

Soon as the saint that speech had heard
His spirit with desire was stirredTo seek the city of the kingAnd to his cot his son to bring.
p. 31
With young disciples at his sideForth on his way the hermit hied,While peasants from their hamlets ranTo reverence the holy man,Each with his little gift of food,Forth came the village multitude,And, as they humbly bowed the head,'What may we do for thee?' they said.Then he, of Bráhmans first and best,The gathered people thus addressed:'Now tell me for I fain would know,Why is it I am honoured so?'They to the high-souled saint replied:'Our ruler is with thee allied.Our master's order we fulfil;O Bráhman, let thy mind be still.'
With joy the saintly hermit heard
Each pleasant and delightful word,And poured a benediction downOn king and ministers and town.Glad at the words of that high saint

Some servants hastened to acquaint
Their king, rejoicing to impartThe tidings that would cheer his heart.Soon as the joyful tale he knewTo meet the saint the monarch flew,The guest-gift in his hand he brought,And bowed before him and besought:'This day by seeing thee I gainNot to have lived my life in vain.Now be not wroth with me, I pray,Because I wiled thy son away.'  
1
The best of Bráhmans answer made:'Be not, great lord of kings, afraid.Thy virtues have not failed to winMy favour, O thou pure of sin.'Then in the front the saint was placed,The king came next in joyous haste,And with him entered his abode,Mid glad acclaim as on they rode.To greet the sage the reverent crowdRaised suppliant hands and humbly bowed.Then from the palace many a dameFollowing well-dressed S'ántá came,Stood by the mighty saint and cried:'See, honour's source, thy son's dear bride.'The saint, who every virtue knew,His arms around his daughter threw,And with a father's rapture pressed

The lady to his wondering breast.
Arising from the saint's embraceShe bowed her low before his face,And then, with palm to palm applied,Stood by her hermit father's side.He for his son, as laws ordain,Performed the rite that frees from stain,  
2
And, honoured by the wise and good,With him departed to the wood.
Footnotes
30:1 The Michelia champaca. It bears a scented yellow 
blossom: 
   'The maid of India blest again to hold
   In her full lap the Champac's leaves of gold.'
Lallah Rookh.
30:2 Vibhándak, the father of Rishyás'ring.
31:1 A hemis'loka is wanting in Schlegel's text, which 
he thus fills up in his Latin translation.

31:2 Rishyas'ring, a Bráhman, had married Sántá who 
was of the Kshatriya or Warrior caste and an expiatory 
ceremony was necessary on account of this violation of the law.
Next: Canto XIX.: The Birth of The Princes.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIX.: THE BIRTH OF THE 
PRINCES.
The seasons six in rapid flight
Had circled since that glorious rite.Eleven months had passed away:'Twas Chaitra's ninth returning day.  
1b
The moon within that mansion shoneWhich Aditi looks kindly on.Raised to their apex in the skyFive brilliant planets beamed on high.Shone with the moon, in Cancer's sign.Vrihaspati  
2b with light divine.
Kaus'alyá bore an infant blestWith heavenly marks of grace impressed;Ráma, the universe's lord,A prince by all the worlds adored.New glory Queen Kaus'alyá wonReflected from her splendid son.So Aditi shone more and more,The Mother of the Gods, when sheThe King of the Immortals  
3b bore,
The thunder-wielding deity.
p. 32

The lotus-eyed, the beauteous boy,
He came fierce Rávan to destroy;From half of Vishnu's vigour born,He came to help the worlds forlorn.And Queen Kaikeyí bore a childOf truest valour, Bharat styled,With every princely virtue blest,One fourth of Vishnu manifest.Sumitrá too a noble pair,Called Lakshman and S'atrughna, bare,Of high emprise, devoted, true,Sharers in Vishnu's essence too.'Neath Pushya's  
1 mansion, Mína's  2 sign,
Was Bharat born, of soul benign.The sun had reached the Crab at mornWhen Queen Sumitrá's babes were born,What time the moon had gone to makeHis nightly dwelling with the Snake.The high-souled monarch's consorts boreAt different times those glorious four,Like to himself and virtuous, brightAs Proshthapadá's  
3 four-fold light.
Then danced the nymphs' celestial throng,  The minstrels raised their strain;The drums of heaven pealed loud and long,And dowers came down in rain.Within Ayodhyá, blithe and gay,All kept the joyous holiday.The spacious square, the ample road

With mimes and dancers overflowed,
And with the voice of music rangWhere minstrels played and singers sang,And shone, a wonder to behold,With dazzling show of gems and gold,Nor did the king his largess spare,For minstrel, driver, bard, to share;Much wealth the Bráhmans bore away,And many thousand dine that day.
Soon as each babe was twelve days old
'Twas time the naming rite to hold.When Saint Vas'ishtha, rapt with joy,Assigned a name to every boy.Ráma, to him the high-souled heir,Bharat, to him Kaikeyí bare:Of Queen Sumitrá one fair sonWas Lakshman, and S'atrughna  
4 one.
Ráma,his sire's supreme delight,Like some proud banner cheered his sight,And to all creatures seemed to beThe self-existent deity.All heroes, versed in holy lore,To all mankind great love they bore.Fair stores of wisdom all possessed,With princely graces all were blest.But mid those youths of high descent,With lordly light preeminent.

Like the full moon unclouded, shone
Ráma, the world's dear paragon.He best the elephant could guide.  
1b
Urge the fleet car, the charger ride;A master he of bowman's skill,Joying to do his father's will.The world's delight and darling, heLoved Lakshman best from infancy;And Lakshman, lord of lofty fate,Upon his elder joyed to wait,Striving his second self to pleaseWith friendship's sweet observances.His limbs the hero ne'er would restUnless the couch his brother pressed;Except beloved Ráma sharedHe could not taste the meal prepared.When Ráma, pride of Raghu's race,Sprang on his steed to urge the chase,Behind him Lakshman loved to goAnd guard him with his trusty bow.As Ráma was to Lakshman dearMore than his life and ever near,So fond S'atrughna prized aboveHis very life his Bharat's love.Illustrious heroes, nobly kindIn mutual love they all combined,And gave their royal sire delightWith modest grace and warrior might:Supported by the glorious four

Shone Das'aratha more and more,
As though, with every guardian,*GodWho keeps the land and skies,The Father of all creatures trodThe earth before men's eyes.
Footnotes
31:1b 'The poet no doubt intended to indicate the vernal 
equinox as the birthday of Ráma. For the month Chaitra 
is the first of the two months assigned to the spring; it corresponds with the latter half of March and the former half of April in our division of the year. Aditi, the mother of the Gods, is lady of the seventh lunar mansion which is called Punarvasu. The five planets and their positions in the Zodiac are thus enumerated by both commentators: the Sun in Aries, Mars in Capricorn, Saturn in Libra, Jupiter in Cancer, Venus in Pisces.... I leave to astronomers to examine whether the parts of the description agree with one another, and, if this be the case, thence to deduce the date. The Indians place the nativity of Ráma in the confines of the second age (tretá) and the third (dwápara): but it seems that this should be taken in an allegorical sense.... We may consider that the poet had an eye to the time in which, immediately before his own age, the aspects of the heavenly bodies were such as he has described.' 

SCHLEGEL.
31:2b The regent of the planet Jupiter.
31:3b Indra=Jupiter Tonans.
32:1 'Pushya is the name of a month; but here it means 
the eighth mansion. The ninth is called Aslesh, or the 
snake. It is evident from this that Bharat, though his birth is mentioned before that of the twins, was the youngest of the four brothers and Rama's junior by eleven months' SCHLEGEL.
32:2 A fish, the Zodiacal sign Pisces.
32:3 One of the constellations, containing stars in the 
wing of Pegasus.
32:4 Ráma means the Delight (of the World); Bharat, the Supporter: Lakshman, the Auspicious; S'atrughna, 
Slayer of' Foes.
Next: Canto XX.: Vis'vámitra's Visit.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XX.: VIS'VÁMITRA'S VISIT.
Now Das'aratha's pious mind
Meet wedlock for his sons designed;
p. 33
With priests and friends the king beganTo counsel and prepare his plan.Such thoughts engaged his bosom, when,To see Ayodhyá's lord of men,A mighty saint of glorious fame,The hermit Vis'vámitra  
1 came.
For evil fiends that roam by nightDisturbed him in each holy rite.And in their strength and frantic rageAssailed with witcheries the sage.He came to seek the monarch's aidTo guard the rites the demons stayed,Unable to a close to bringOne unpolluted offering.Seeking the king in this dire straitHe said to those who kept the gate:'Haste, warders, to your master run,And say that here stands Gádhi's son.'

Soon as they heard the holy man,
To the king's chamber swift they ranWith minds disordered all, and spurredTo wildest zeal by what they heard.On to the royal hall they sped,There stood and lowly bowed the head,And made the lord of men awareThat the great saint was waiting there.   The king with priest and peer arose     And ran the sage to meet,   As Indra from his palace goes     Lord Brahmá's self to greet.When glowing with celestial lightThe pious hermit was in sight,The king, whose mien his transport showed,The honoured gift for guests bestowed.Nor did the saint that gift despise,Offered as holy texts advise;He kindly asked the earth's great kingHow all with him was prospering.The son of Kus'ik  
2 bade him tell
If all in town and field were well,All well with friends, and kith and kin,And royal treasure stored within:   'Do all thy neighbours own thy sway?     Thy foes confess thee yet?   Dost thou continue still to pay     To Gods and men each debt?'Then he of hermits first and best,

Vas'ishtha with a smile  3 addressed,
And asked him of his welfare too,
Showing him honour as was due.Then with the sainted hermit allWent joyous to the monarch's hall,And sate them down by due degree,Each one, of rank and dignity.Joy filled the noble prince's breastWho thus bespoke the honoured guest:'As amrit  
1b by a mortal found,
As rain upon the thirsty ground,As to an heirless man a sonBorn to him of his precious one,As gain of what we sorely miss,As sudden dawn of mighty bliss,So is thy coming here to me:All welcome, mighty Saint, to thee.What wish within thy heart hast thou?If I can please thee, tell me how.Hail, Saint, from whom all honours flow,Worthy of all I can bestow.Blest is my birth with fruit to-day,Nor has my life been thrown away.I see the best of Bráhman raceAnd night to glorious morn gives place.Thou, holy Sage, in days of oldAmong the royal saints enrolled,Didst, penance glorified, within

The Bráhman caste high station win.
'Tis meet and right in many a wayThat I to thee should honour pay.This seems a marvel to mine eyes:All sin thy visit purifies;And I by seeing thee, O Sage,Have reaped the fruit of pilgrimage.Then say what thou wouldst have me do,That thou hast sought this interview.Favoured by thee, my wish is still,O Hermit, to perform thy will.Nor needest thou at length explainThe object that thy heart would gain.Without reserve I grant it now:My deity, O Lord, art thou.'
The glorious hermit, far renowned,
With highest fame and virtue crowned,Rejoiced these modest words to hearDelightful to the mind and ear.
Footnotes
32:1b Schlegel. in the Indische Bibliothek, remarks that 
the proficiency of the Indians in this art early attracted 
the attention of Alexander's successors, and natives of 

India were so long exclusively employed in this service 
that the name Indian was applied to any elephant-driver, to whatever country be might belong.
33:1 The story of this famous saint is given at sufficient 
length in Cantos LI-LV. 
This saint has given his name to the district and city to 
the east of Benares. The original name, preserved in a land- grant on copper now in the Museum of the Benares College, has been Moslemized into Ghazeepore (the City of the Soldier- martyr).
33:2 The son of Kus'ik is Vis'vámitra.
33:3 At the recollection of their former enmity, to be 
described hereafter.
Next: Canto XXI.: Vis'vámitra's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXI.: VIS'VÁMITRA'S SPEECH.
The hermit heard with high content
That speech so wondrous eloquent,And while each hair with joy arose, 
2b
p. 34
He thus made answer at the close:'Good is thy speech O noble King,And like thyself in everything.So should their lips be wisdom-fraughtWhom kings begot, Vas'ishtha taught.The favour which I came to seekThou grantest ere my tongue can speak.But let my tale attention claim,And hear the need for which I came,O King, as Scripture texts allow,A holy rite employs me now.Two fiends who change their forms at willImpede that rite with cursed skill. 
1
Oft when the task is nigh complete,These worst of fiends my toil defeat,Throw bits of bleeding flesh, and o'erThe altar shed a stream of gore.

When thus the rite is mocked and stayed,
And all my pious hopes delayed,Cast down in heart the spot I leave,And spent with fruitless labour grieve.Nor can I, checked by prudence, dareLet loose my fury on them there:The muttered curse, the threatening word,In such a rite must ne'er be heard.Thy grace the rite from check can free.And yield the fruit I long to see.Thy duty bids thee, King, defendThe suffering guest, the suppliant friend.Give me thy son, thine eldest born,Whom locks like raven's wings adorn,That hero youth, the truly brave,Of thee, O glorious King, I crave,For he can lay those demons lowWho mar my rites and work me woe:My power shall shield the youth from harm,And heavenly might shall nerve his arm.And on my champion will I showerUnnumbered gifts of varied power,Such gifts as shall ensure his fameAnd spread through all the worlds his name.Be sure those fiends can never standBefore the might of Ráma's hand,And mid the best and bravest noneCan slay that pair but Raghu's son.Entangled in the toils of Fate

Those sinners, proud and obstinate,
Are, in their fury overbold,No match for Ráma mighty-souled.Nor let a father's breast give wayToo far to fond affection's sway.Count thou the fiends already slain:My word is pledged, nor pledged in vain.I know the hero Ráma well
In whom high thoughts and valour dwell;
So does Vas'ishtha, so do theseEngaged in long austerities.If thou would do the righteous deed,And win high fame, thy virtue's meed,Fame that on earth shall last and live,To me. great King, thy Ráma give.If to the words that I have said,With Saint Vas'ishtha at their headThy holy men, O King, agree,Then let thy Ráma go with me.Ten nights my sacrifice will last,And ere the stated time be pastThose wicked fiends, those impious twain,Must fall by wondrous Ráma slain.Let not the hours, I warn thee, fly,Fixt for the rite, unheeded by;Good luck have thou, O royal Chief,Nor give thy heart to needless grief."

Thus in fair words with virtue fraught
The pious glorious saint besought.But the good speech with poignant stingPierced ear and bosom of the king,Who, stabbed with pangs too sharp to bear,Fell prostrate and lay fainting there.
Footnotes
33:1b The Indian nectar or drink of the Gods.
33:2b Great joy, according to the Hindu belief, has this 
effect, not causing each particular hair to stand on end, 
but gently raising all the down upon the body.
34:1 The Rákshasas, giants, or fiends who are 
represented as disturbing the sacrifice, signify here, as 
often elsewhere, merely the savage tribes which placed themselves in hostile opposition to Bráhmanical institutions.
Next: Canto XXII.: Das'aratha's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXII.: DAS'ARATHA'S SPEECH.
His tortured senses all astray,
Awhle the hapless monarch lay,Then slowly gathering thought and strengthTo Visvámitra spoke at length:'My son is but a child, I ween;This year he will be just sixteen.How is he fit for such emprise,My darling with the lotus eyes?A mghty army will I bringThat calls me master, lord, and king,And with its countless squadrons fightAgainst these rovers of the night.Mv faithful heroes skilled to wieldThe arms of war will take the field;Their skill the demons' might may break:Ráma, my child, thou must not take.I, even I, my bow in hand,Will in the van of battle stand,And, while my soul is left alive,With the night-roaming demons strive.Thy guarded sacrifice shall beCompleted, from all hindrance free.Thither will I my journey make:Ráma, my child, thou must not take.

A boy unskilled, he knows not yet
The bounds to strength and weakness set,No match is he for demon foesWho magic arts to arms oppose.
p. 35
O chief of saints, I have no power,Of Ráma reft, to live one hour:Mine aged heart at once would break:Ráma, my child, thou must not take.Nine thousand circling years have fledWith all their seasons o'er my head,And as a hard-won boon, O sage,These sons have come to cheer mine age.My dearest love amid the fourIs he whom first his mother bore,Still dearer for his virtues' sake:Ráma, my child, thou must not take.But if, unmoved by all I say,Thou needs must bear my son away,Let me lead with him, I entreat,A four-fold army  
1 all complete.
What is the demons' might, O Sage?Who are they? What their parentage?What is their size? What beings lendTheir power to guard them and befriend?How can my son their arts withstand?Or I or all my armed band?

Tell me the whole that I may know
To meet in war each evil foeWhom conscious might inspires with pride.'
And Vis'vámitra thus replied:
'Sprung from Pulastya's race there cameA giant known by Rávan's name.Once favoured by the Eternal SireHe plagues the worlds in ceaseless ire,For peerless power and might renowned,By giant bands encompassed round.Vis'ravas for his sire they hold,His brother is the Lord of Gold.King of the giant hosts is he,And worst of all in cruelty.This Rávan's dread commands impelTwo demons who in might excel,Maricha and Suváhu hight,To trouble and impede the rite.'
Then thus the king addressed the sage:
'No power have I, my lord, to wageWar with this evil-minded foe;Now pity on my darling show,And upon me of hapless fate,For thee as God I venerate.Gods, spirits, bards of heavenly birth,  
2
The birds of air, the snakes of earthBefore the might of Rávan quail,

Much less, can mortal man avail.
He draws, I hear, from out the breast
The valour of the mightiest.
No, ne'er can I with him contend,Or with the forces he may send.How can I then my darling lend,Godlike, unskilled in battle? No,I will not let my young child go.Foes of thy rite, those mighty ones,Sunda and Upasunda's sons,Are fierce as Fate to overthrow:I will not let my young child go.Maricha and Suváhu fellAre valiant and instructed well.One of the twain I might attack.With all my friends their lord to back.'
Footnotes
35:1 Consisting of horse, foot, chariots, and elephants.
35:2 'The Gandharvas, or heavenly bards, had originally 
a warlike character but were afterwards reduced to the 
office of celestial musicians cheering the banquets of the Gods. Dr. Kuhn has shown their identity with the 

Centaurs in name, origin and attributes.' GORRESIO.
Next: Canto XXIII.: Vas'ishtha's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIII.: VAS'ISHTHA'S SPEECH.
While thus the hapless monarch spoke,
Paternal love his utterance broke.Then words like these the saint returned.And fury in his bosom burned:'Didst thou, O King, a promise make,And wishest now thy word to break?A son of Raghu's line should scornTo fail in faith, a man forsworn.But if thy soul can bear the shameI will return e'en as I came.Live with thy sons, and joy be thine,False scion of Kakutstha's line.'
As Vis'vámitra, mighty sage,
Was moved with this tempestuous rage,Earth rocked and reeled throughout her frame,And fear upon the Immortals came.But Saint Vas'ishtha, wisest seer,Observant of his vows austere,Saw the whole world convulsed with dread,And thus unto the monarch said:'Thou, born of old Ikshváku's seed,Art Justice' self in mortal weed.Constant and pious, blest by fate,

The right thou must not violate.
Thou, Raghu's son, so famous throughThe triple world as just and true,Perform thy bounden duty still,Nor stain thy race by deed of illIf thou have sworn and now refuseThou must thy store of merit lose.Then, Monarch, let thy Ráma go,Nor fear for him the demon foe.The fiends shall have no power to hurtHim trained to war or inexpert,Nor vanquish him in battle field,For Kus'ik's son the youth will shield.He is incarnate Justice, heThe best of men for bravery.Embodied love of penance drear,Among the wise without a peer.
p. 36
Full well he knows, great Kus'ik's son,The arms celestial, every one,Arms from the Gods themselves concealed,Far less to other men revealed.These arms to him, when earth he swayed,Mighty Kris'ás'va, pleased, conveyed.Kris'ás'va's sons they are indeed,Brought forth by Daksha's lovely seed,  
1
Heralds of conquest, strong and bold,

Brilliant, of semblance manifold.
Jayá and Vijayá, most fair,And hundred splendid weapons bare.Of Jayá, glorious as the morn,First fifty noble sons were born.Boundless in size yet viewless too,They came the demons to subdue.And fifty children also cameOf Vijayá the beauteous dame,Samháras named, of mighty force,Hard to assail or check in course.Of these the hermit knows the use,And weapons new can he produce.All these the mighty saint will yieldTo Ráma's hand, to own and wield;And armed with these, beyond a doubtShall Ráma put those fiends to rout.For Ráma and the people's sake,For thine own good my counsel take,Nor seek, O King, with fond delay,The parting of thy son to stay,'
Next: Canto XXIV.: The Spells.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIV.: THE SPELLS.
Vas'ishtha thus was speaking still:
The monarch, of his own free will.Bade with quick seal and joyful cheerRáma and Lakshman hasten near.Mother and sire in loving careSped their dear son with rite and prayer:Vas'ishtha blessed him ere he went;O'er his loved head the father bent,And then to Kus'ik's son resignedRáma with Lakshman close behind.Standing by Vis'vámitra's side,The youthful hero, lotus-eyed,The Wind-God saw, and sent a breezeWhose sweet pure touch just waved the trees.There fell from heaven a flowery rain,And with the song and dance the strainOf shell and tambour sweetly blentAs forth the son of Raghu went.
The hermit led: behind him came
The bow-armed Ráma, dear to fame,Whose locks were like the raven's wing;  
1b
Then Lakshman, closely following.

The Gods and Indra, filled with joy,
Looked down upon the royal boy,And much they longed the death to seeOf their ten-headed enemy.  
2b
Ráma and Lakshman paced behindThat hermit of the lofty mind.As the young As'vins,  
3b heavenly pair,
Follow Lord Indra through the air.On arm and hand the guard they wore,Quiver and bow and sword they bore;Two fire-born Gods of War seemed they.  
4b
He, S'iva's self who led the way.
Upon fair Sarjú's southern shore
They now had walked a league and more,When thus the sage in accents mildTo Ráma said: 'Beloved child,This lustral water duly touch;My counsel will avail thee much.Forget not all the words I say,Nor let the occasion slip away.Lo, with two spells I thee invest,The mighty and the mightiest.O'er thee fatigue shall ne'er prevail,Nor age or change thy limbs assail.Thee powers of darkness ne'er shall smiteln tranquil sleep or wild delight.No one is there in all the landThine equal for the vigorous hand.

p. 37
Thou, when thy lips pronounce the spell,
Shalt have no peer in heaven or hell,None in the world with thee shall vie,O sinless one, in apt reply,In fortune, knowledge, wit, and tact,Wisdom to plan and skill to act.This double science take, and gainGlory that shall for aye remain.Wisdom and judgment spring from eachOf these fair spells whose use I teach.Hunger and thirst unknown to thee,High in the worlds thy rank shall be.For these two spells with might endued,Are the Great Father's heavenly brood,And thee, O Chief, may fitly grace,Thou glory of Kakutstha's race.Virtues which none can match are thine,Lord, from thy birth, of gifts divine,And now these spells of might shall castFresh radiance o'er the gifts thou hast.'Then Ráma duly touched the wave,   Raised suppliant hands, bowed low his head,And took the spells the hermit gave   Whose soul on contemplation fed.From him whose might these gifts enhanced,A brighter beam of glory glanced:

So shines in all his autumn blaze
The Day-God of the thousand rays.The hermit's wants those youths supplied,As pupils use to holy guide.And then the night in sweet contentOn Sarjú's pleasant bank they spent.
Footnotes
36:1 These mysterious animated weapons are 
enumerated in Cantos XXIX and XXX. Daksha was the 
son of Brahmá and one of the Prajápatis, Demiurgi, or secondary authors of creation.
36:1b Youths of the Kshatriya class used to leave 
unshorn the side locks of their hair. These were called 
Káka-paksha, or raven's wings.
36:2b The Rákshas or giant Rávan, king ot Lanká.
36:3b The meaning of As'vins (from as'va a horse, 
Persian asp, Greek •ιππος, Latin equus, Welsh *eck, is 
Horsemen. They were twin deities of whom frequent mention is made in the Vedas and the Indian myths. The As'vins have much in common with the Dioscuri of Greece, and their mythical genealogy seems to indicate 

that their origin was astronomical. They were, perhaps, 
at first the morning star and evening star. They are said to be the children of the sun and the nymph As'viní, who is one of the lunar asterisms personified. In the popular mythology they are regarded as the physicians of the Gods. GORRESIO.
36:4b The word Kumára, (a young prince, h Childe, is 
also a proper name of Skanda or Kártikeya God of War, 
the son of S'iva and Umá. The babe was matured in the fire. See Appendix, Kártikeii Generatio.
Next: Canto XXV.: The Hermitage of Love.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXV.: THE HERMITAGE OF 
LOVE.
Soon as appeared the morning light
Up rose the mighty anchorite,And thus to youthful Ráma said,Who lay upon his leafy bed:'High fate is hers who calls thee son:   Arise,'tis break of day;Rise, Chief, and let those rites be done   Due at the morning's ray.' 
1
At that great sage's high behest   Up sprang the princely pair,To bathing rites themselves addressed,   And breathed the holiest prayer.Their morning task completed, they   To Vis'vámitra came
That store of holy works, to pay
   The worship saints may claim.Then to the hallowed spot they went   Along fair Sarjú's sideWhere mix her waters confluent   With three-pathed Gangá's tide.  
1b
There was a sacred hermitage

   Where saints devout of mind
Their lives through many a lengthened age   To penance had resigned.That pure abode the princes eyed   With unrestrained delight,And thus unto the saint they cried.   Rejoicing at the sight:'Whose is that hermitage we see?   Who makes his dwelling there?Full of desire to hear are we:   O Saint, the truth declare.'The hermit smiling made reply   To the two boys' request:'Hear, Rama, who in days gone by   This calm retreat possessed.Kandarpa in apparent form,   Called Káma  
2b by the wise,
Dared Umá's  3b new-wed lord to storm
   And make the God his prize.'Gainst Sthánu's  
4b self, on rites austere
   And vows intent,  5b they say,
His bold rash hand be dared to rear,   Though Sthánu cried, Away!But the God's eye with scornful glare   Fell terrible on him.Dissolved the shape that was so fair
p. 38

   And burnt up every limb.
Since the great God's terrific rage   Destroyed his form and frame,Káma in each succeeding age   Has borne Ananga's  
1 name.
So, where his lovely form decayed,   This land is Anga styled:Sacred to him of old this shade,   And hermits undefiled.Here Scripture-talking elders sway   Each sense with firm control,And penance-rites have washed away   All sin from every soul.One night, fair boy, we here will spend,   A pure stream on each hand,And with to-morrow's light will bend   Our steps to yonder strand.Here let us bathe, and free from stain   To that pure grove repair,Sacred to Káma, and remain   One night in comfort there.'With penance' far-discerning eye   The saintly men beheldTheir coming, and with transport high   Each holy bosom swelled.To Kus'ik's son the gift they gave   That honoured guest should greet,Water they brought his feet to lave,   And showed him honor meet.

Ráma, and Lakshman next obtained
   In due degree their share.Then with sweet talk the guests remained,   And charmed each listener there.The evening prayers were duly said   With voices calm and low:Then on the ground each laid his head   And slept till morning's glow.
Footnotes
37:1 'At the rising of the sun as well as at noon certain 
observances, invocations, and prayers were prescribed 
which might under no circumstances be omitted. One of these observances was the recitation of the Sávitri, a Vedic hymn to the Sun of wonderful beauty.' GORBESIO.
37:1b Tripathaga, Three-path-go, flowing in heaven, on 
earth, and under the earth. See Canto XLV
37:2b Tennyson's ' Indian Cama,' the God of Love, known also by many other names.
37:3b Uma, or Parvati, was daughter of Himálaya, Monarch of mountains, and wife of S'iva. See 

Kálidása's Kumára Sambhava, or Birth of the War-God.
37:4b Sthánu, The Unmoving one, a name of S'iva.
37:5b The practice of austerities, voluntary tortures, and 
mortifications was anciently universal in India, and was 
held by the Indians to be of immense efficacy. Hence they mortified themselves to expiate sins, to acquire merits, and to obtain superhuman gifts and powers; the Gods themselves sometimes exercised themselves in such austerities, either to raise themselves to greater power and grandeur, or to counteract the austerities of man which threatened to prevail over them and to deprive them of heaven.... Such austerities were called in India tapas (burning ardour, fervent devotion) and he who practised them tapasvin.'GORRESIO.
Next: Canto XXVI.: The Forest of Tádaká.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVI.: THE FOREST OF TÁDAKÁ.
When the fair light of morning rose
The princely turners of their foesFollowed, his morning worship o'er,The hermit to the river's shore.The high-souled men with thoughtful careA pretty barge had stationed there.All cried. 'O lord, this barge ascend,And with thy princely followers bendTo yonder side thy prosperous wayWith naught to check thee or delay.'
Nor did the saint their rede reject:
He bade farewell with due respect,And crossed, attended by the twain,That river rushing to the main.When now the bark was half way o'er,Ráma and Lakshman heard the roar,
That louder grew and louder yet,
Of waves by dashing waters met.Then Ráma asked the mighty seer:'What is the tumult that I hearOf waters cleft in mid career?'

Soon as the speech of Ráma, stirred
By deep desire to know, he heard,The pious saint began to tellWhat paused the waters' roar and swell:'On high Kailása's distant hill   There lies a noble lakeWhose waters, born from Brahmá's will,   The name of Mánas 
1b take.
Thence, hallowing where'er they flow,   The streams of Sarjú fall,And wandering through the plains below   Embrace Ayodhyá's wall.Still, still preserved in Sarjú's name   Sarovar's 
2b fame we trace.
The flood of Brahma whence she came   To run her holy race.To meet great Gangá here she hies   With tributary wave:Hence the loud roar ye hear arise,   Of floods that swell and rave.Here, pride of Raghu's line, do thouIn humble adoration bow.'
He spoke. The princes both obeyed,
And reverence to each river paid. 
3b
They reached the southern shore at last,And gaily on their journey passed.A little space beyond there stoodA gloomy awe-inspiring wood.

The monarch's noble son began
To question thus the holy man:'Whose gloomy forest meets mine eyeLike some vast cloud that fills the sky?Pathless and dark it seems to be,Where birds in thousands wander free;Where shrill cicadas' cries resound,
p. 39
And fowl of dismal note abound,Lion, rhinoceros, and bear,Boar, tiger, elephant, are there,   There shrubs and thorns run wild:Dháo, Sál, Bignonia, Bel, 
1 are found,
And every tree that grows on ground.   How is the forest styled?'The glorious saint this answer made:   'Dear child of Raghu, hearWho dwells within the horrid shade   That looks so dark and drear.Where now is wood, long ere this day   Two broad and fertile lands,Malaja and Karúsha lay.   Adorned by heavenly hands.Here, mourning friendship's broken ties,Lord Indra of the thousand eyesHungered and sorrowed many a day,His brightness soiled with mud and clay,

When in a storm of passion he
Had slain his dear friend Namuchi.Then came the Gods and saints who boreTheir golden pitchers brimming o'erWith holy streams that banish stain,And bathed Lord Indra pure again.When in this land the God was freedFrom spot and stain of impious deedFor that his own dear friend he slew,High transport thrilled his bosom through.Then in his joy the lands he blessed,And gave a boon they long possessed:'Because these fertile lands retainThe washings of the blot and stain,'   'Twas thus Lord Indra sware,'Malaja and Karúsha's nameShall celebrate with deathless fame   My malady and care.' 
2
'So be it', all the Immortals cried,   When Indra's speech they heard,And with acclaim they ratified   The names his lips conferred.Long time, O victor of thy foes,These happy lands had sweet repose,And higher still in fortune rose.At length a spirit, loving ill,Tádaká , wearing shapes at will,
Whose mighty strength, exceeding vast

A thousand elephants, surpassed,
Was to fierce Sunda, lord and headOf all the demon armies, wed.From her, Lord Indra's peer in mightGiant Máricha sprang to light:And she, a constant plague and pest,These two fair realms has long distressed.Now dwelling in her dark abodeA league away she bars the road:And we, O Ráma, hence must goWhere lies the forest of the foe.Now on thine own right arm rely,   And my command obey:Smite the foul monster that she die.   And take the plague away.To reach this country none may dare   Fallen from its old estate,Which she, whose fury naught can bear,   Has left so desolate.And now my truthful tale is told   How with accursed swayThe spirit plagued this wood of old,   And ceases not to-day.'
Footnotes
38:1 The Bodiless one.

38:1b 'A celebrated lake regarded in India as sacred. It 
lies in the lofty region between the northern highlands 
of the Himalayas and mount Kailása, the region of the sacred lakes. The poem, following the popular Indian belief, makes the river Sarayú (now Sarjú) flow from the Mánasa lake; the sources of the river are a little to the south about a day's journey from the lake. See Lassen, Indische Alterthumsbunde, page 34.' GORBESIO. Manas means mind; mánasa, mental, mind-born.
38:2b Sarovar means best of lakes. This is another of 
the poet's fanciful etymologies.
38:3b The confluence of two or more rivers is often a venerated and holy place. The most famous is Prayág or 
Allahabad, where the Sarasvatí by an underground course is believed to join the Jumna and the Ganges.
39:1 The botanical names of the trees mentioned in the 
text are Grislea Tormentosa, Shorea Robusta, Echites 
Antidysenterica, Bignonia Suaveolens, Aegle Marmelos, and Diospyrus Glutinosa. I have omitted the Kutaja (Echites) and the Tinduka (Diospyrus).
39:2 Here we meet with a fresh myth to account for the 
name of these regions. Malaja is probably a non-Aryan 

word signifying a hilly country: taken as a Sanskrit 
compound it means sprung from defilement. The word Karúsha appears to have a somewhat similar meaning.
Next: Canto XXVII.: The Birth of Tádaká.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVII.: THE BIRTH OF TÁDAKÁ.
When thus the sage without a peer
Had closed that story strange to hear.Ráma again the saint addressedTo set one lingering doubt at rest:'O holy man, 'tis said by allThat spirits' strength is weak and small:How can she match, of power so slight,A thousand elephants in might?'And Vis'vámitra thus repliedTo Raghu's son the glorified:'Listen, and I will tell thee howShe gained the strength that arms her now.A mighty spirit lived of yore;Suketu was the name he bore.Childless was he, and free from crimeIn rites austere he passed his time.The mighty Sire was pleased to showHis favour, and a child bestow.Tádaká named, most fair to see.A pearl among the maids was she.And matched, for such was Brahmá's dower,A thousand elephants in power.Nor would the Eternal Sire, althoughThe spirit longed, a son bestow.

That maid in beauty's youthful pride
Was given to Sunda for a bride.Her son, Máricha was his name,A giant, through a curse, became.She, widowed, dared with him molest
p. 40
Agastya,  1 of all saints the best.
Inflamed with hunger's wildest rage,Roaring she rushed upon the sage.When the great hermit saw her near,On speeding in her fierce career,He thus pronounced Márícha's doom:'A giant's form and shape assume.'And then, by mighty anger swayed,On Tádaká this curse he laid:'Thy present form and semblance quit,And wear a shape thy mood to fit;Changed form and feature by my ban.A fearful thing that feeds on man.'
She, by his awful curse possessed,
And mad with rage that fills her breast,Has on this land her fury dealtWhere once the saint Agastya dwelt.Go, Ráma, smite this monster dead,The wicked plague, of power so dread,And further by this deed of thine,

The good of Bráhmans and of kine,
Thy hand alone can overthrow,In all the worlds, this impious foe.Nor let compassion lead thy mindTo shrink from blood of womankind;A monarch's son must ever countThe people's welfare paramount.And whether pain or joy he dealDare all things for his subjects' weal;Yea, if the deed bring praise or guilt,If life be saved or blood be spilt:Such, through all time, should be the careOf those a kingdom's weight who bear.Slay, Ráma, slay this impious fiend,For by no law her life is screened.So Manthará, as bards have told,Virochan's child, was slain of oldBy Indra, when in furious hateShe longed the earth to devastate.So Kávya's mother, Bhrigu's wife,Who loved her husband as her life,When Indra's throne she sought to gain,By Vishnu's hand of yore was slain.By these and high-souled kings beside,Struck down, have lawless women died.'
Footnotes

40:1 'This is one of those indefinable mythic personages 
who are found in the ancient traditions of many nations, 
and in whom cosmogonical or astronomical notions are generally figured. Thus it is related of Agastya that the Vindhyan mountains prostrated themselves before him; and yet the same Agastya is believed to be regent of the star Canopus,' --GORRESIO. 
He will appear as the friend and helper of Ráma farther 
on in the poem.
Next: Canto XXVIII.: The Death of Tádaká

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVIII.: THE DEATH OF TÁDAKÁ
Thus spoke the saint. Each vigorous word
The noble monarch's offspring heard,And, reverent hands together laid,His answer to the hermit made:'My sire and mother bade me ayeThy word, O mighty Saint, obeySo will I, O most glorious, killThis Tádaká who joys in ill,For such my sire's, and such thy will.To aid with mine avenging handThe Bráhmans, kine, and all the land,Obedient, heart and soul, I stand.'
Thus spoke the tamer of the foe,
And by the middle grasped his bow.Strongly he drew the sounding stringThat made the distant welkin ring.Scared by the mighty clang the deerThat roamed the forest shook with fear.And Tádaká the echo heard,And rose in haste from slumber stirred.In wild amaze, her soul aflameWith fury toward the spot she came.When that foul shape of evil mien

And stature vast as e'er was seen
The wrathful son of Raghu eyed,He thus unto his brother cried:'Her dreadful shape, O Lakshman, see,A form to shudder at and flee.The hideous monster's very viewWould cleave a timid heart in two.Behold the demon hard to smite,Defended by her magic might.My hand shall stay her course to-day,And shear her nose and ears away.No heart have I her life to take:I spare it for her sex's sake.My will is but, with 'minished force,To check her in her evil course.'While thus he spoke, by rage impelled   Roaring as she came nigh,The fiend her course at Ráma held   With huge arms tossed on high.Her, rushing on, the seer assailed   With a loud cry of hate;And thus the sons of Raghu hailed:   'Fight, and be fortunate.'Then from the earth a horrid cloud   Of dust the demon raised,And for awhile in darkling shroud   Wrapt Raghu's sons amazed.Then calling on her magic power   The fearful fight to wage,

She smote him with a stony shower,
   Till Ráma burned with rage.Then pouring forth his arrowy rain   That stony flood to stay,
p. 41
With winged darts, as she charged amain,   He shore her hands away.As Tádaká still thundered near   Thus maimed by Ráma's blows,Lakshman in fury severed sheer   The monster's ears and nose.Assuming by her magic skill,   A fresh and fresh disguise,She tried a thousand shapes at will,   Then vanished from their eyes.When Gádhi's son of high renownStill saw the stony rain pour downUpon each princely warrior's head,With words of wisdom thus he said:'Enough of mercy, Ráma, lestThis sinful evil-working pest,Disturber of each holy rite,Repair by magic arts her might.Without delay the fiend should die,For, see, the twilight hour is nigh.And at the joints of night and daySuch giant foes are hard to slay.'

Then Ráma, skilful to direct
   His arrow to the sound,With shafts the mighty demon checked   Who rained her stones around.She sore impeded and besetBy Ráma and his arrowy net,Though skilled in guile and magic lore,Rushed on the brothers with a roar.Deformed, terrific, murderous, dread,Swift as the levin on she sped,Like cloudy pile in autumn's sky,Lifting her two vast arms on high,When Ráma smote her with a dart,Shaped like a crescent, to the heart.Sore wounded by the shaft that cameWith lightning speed and surest aim,Blood spouting from her mouth and side.She fell upon the earth and died.Soon as the Lord who rules the skySaw the dread monster lifeless lie,He called aloud, Well done! well done!And the Gods honoured Raghu's son.Standing in heaven the Thousand-eyed,With all the Immortals, joying cried:'Lift up thine eyes, O Saint, and seeThe Gods and Indra nigh to thee.This deed of Ráma's boundless mightHas filled our bosoms with delight,Now, for our will would have it so,

To Raghu's son some favour show.
Invest him with the power which naughtBut penance gains and holy thought,Those heavenly arms on him bestowTo thee entrusted long agoBy great Krisás'va best of kings,Son of the Lord of living things,More fit recipient none can beThan he who joys it following theeAnd for our sakes the monarch's seedHas yet to do a mighty deed.'
He spoke; and all the heavenly train
Rejoicing sought their homes again,While honour to the saint they paid.Then came the evening's twilight shade,The best of hermits overjoyedTo know the monstrous fiend destroyed,His lips on Ráma's forehead pressed,And thus the conquering chief addressed:'O Ráma gracious to the sight.Here will we pass the present night,And with the morrow's earliest rayBend to my hermitage our way.'The son of Das'aratha heard,Delighted, Vis'vámitra's word,And as he bade, that night he spentIn Tádaká's wild wood, content.And the grove shone that happy day,

Freed from the curse that on it lay,
Like Chaitraratha  1 fair and gay.
Next: Canto XXIX. : The Celestial Arms.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIX.  2: THE CELESTIAL ARMS.
That night they slept and took their rest;
And then the mighty saint addressed,With pleasant smile and accents mildThese words to Raghu's princely child:'Well pleased am I. High fate be thine,Thou scion of a royal line.Now will I, for I love thee so,All heavenly arms on thee bestow.Victor with these, whoe'er oppose,Thy hand shall conquer all thy foes,Though Gods and spirits of the air,Serpents and fiends, the conflict dare.I'll give thee as a pledge of loreThe mystic arms they use above,For worthy thou to have revealedThe weapons I have learnt to wield.
p. 42
First, son of Raghu, shall be thineThe arm of Vengeance, strong, divine:The arm of Fate, the arm of Right,And Vishnu's arm of awful might:That, before whioh no foe can stand,

The thunderbolt of Indra's hand;
And S'iva's trident, sharp and dread,And that dire weapon Brahmá's Head,And two fair clubs, O royal child,One Charmer and one Pointed styledWith flame of lambent fire aglow,On thee, O Chieftain, I bestow.And Fate's dread net and Justice' nooseThat none may conquer, for thy use:And the great cord, renowned of old,Which Varun ever loves to hold.Take these two thunderbolts, which IHave got for thee, the Moist and Dry,Here S'iva's dart to thee I yield,And that which Vishnu wont to wield.I give to thee the arm of Fire,Desired by all and named the Spire.To thee I grant the Wind-God's dart,Named Crusher, O thou pure of heart.This arm, the Horse's Head, accept,And this, the Curlew's Bill yclept,And these two spears, the best e'er flew,Named the Invincible and True.And arms of fiends I make thine own,Skull-wreath and mace that smashes bone.And Joyous, whioh the spirits bear,Great weapon of the sons of air.Brave offspring of the best of lords,I give thee now the Gem of swords,

And offer next, thine hand to arm,
The heavenly bards' beloved charm.Now with two arms I thee investOf never-ending Sleep and Rest,With weapons of the Sun and Rain,And those that dry and burn amain;And strong Desire with conquering touch,The dart that Káma prizes much.I give the arm of shadowy powersThat bleeding flesh of men devours.I give the arms the God of GoldAnd giant fiends exult to hold.This smites the foe in battle-strife,And takes his fortune, strength, and life.I give the arms called False and True,And great Illusion give I too;The hero's arm called Strong and BrightThat spoils the foeman's strength in fight.I give thee as a priceless boonThe Dew, the weapon of the Moon,And add the weapon, deftly planned,That strengthens Vis'vakarmá's hand.The Mortal dart whose point is chill,And Slaughter, ever sure to kill;All these and other arms, for thouArt very dear, I give thee now.Receive these weapons from my hand,Son of the noblest in the land.'

Facing the east, the glorious saint
Pure from all spot of earthly taint,To Ráma, with delighted mind,That noble host of spells consigned.He taught the arms, whose lore is wonHardly by Gods, to Raghu's son.He muttered low the spell whose callSummons those arms and rules them allAnd, each in visible form and frame,Before the monarch's son they came.They stood and spoke in reverent guiseTo Ráma with exulting cries:'O noblest child of Raghu, see,Thy ministers and thralls are we.'   With joyful heart and eager handRáma received the wondrous band,And thus with words of welcome cried:'Aye present to my will abide.'Then hasted to the saint to payDue reverence, and pursued his way.
Footnotes
41:1 The famous pleasure-garden of Kuvera the God of 
Wealth.

41:2 'The whole of this Canto together with the 
following one, regards the belief, formerly prevalent in 
India, that by virtue of certain spells, to be learnt and muttered, secret knowledge and superhuman powers might be acquired. To this the poet has already alluded in Canto xxiii. These incorporeal weapons are partly represented according to the fashion of those ascribed to the Gods and the different orders of demi-gods, partly are the mere creations of fancy; and it would not be easy to say what idea the poet had of them in his own mind, or what powers he meant to assign to each.' SCHLEGEL.
Next: Canto XXX.: The Mysterious Powers.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXX.: THE MYSTERIOUS 
POWERS. 1
Pure, with glad cheer and joyful breast,
Of those mysterious arms possessed,Ráma, now passing on his way,Thus to the saint began to say:'Lord of these mighty weapons, ICan scarce be harmed by Gods on high;Now, best of saints, I long to gainThe powers that can these arms restrain.'Thus spoke the prince. The sage austere,True to his vows, from evil clear,Called forth the names of those great charmsWhose powers restrain the deadly arms,Receive thou True and Truly famed,And Bold and Fleet: the weapons named
p. 43
Warder and Progress, swift of pace,Averted-head and Drooping-face;The Seen, and that which Secret flies;The weapon of the thousand eyes;Ten-headed, and the Hundred-faced,

Star-gazer and the Layer-waste:
The Omen-bird, the Pure-from-spot,The pair that wake and slumber not:The Fiendish, that which shakes amain,The Strong-of-Hand, the Rich-in-Gain:The Guardian, and the Close-allied,The Gaper, Love, and Golden-side;O Raghu's son receive all these,Bright ones that wear what forms they please;Kris'ásva's mystic sons are they,And worthy thou their might to sway.'With joy the pride of Raghu's raceReceived the hermit's proffered grace,Mysterious arms, to check and stay,Or smite the foeman in the fray.Then, all with heavenly forms endued,Nigh came the wondrous multitude.Celestial in their bright attireSome shone like coals of burning fire;Some were like clouds of dusky smoke;And suppliant thus they sweetly spoke:'Thy thralls, O Ráma, here we stand:Command, we pray, thy faithful band''Depart,' he cried, 'where each may list,But when I call you to assist,Be present to my mind with speed,And aid me in the hour of need.'
To Ráma then they lowly bent,

And round him in due reverence went.
To his command, they answered, Yea,And as they came so went away.When thus the arms had homeward flown,With pleasant words and modest tone,E'en as he walked, the prince beganTo question thus the holy man:'What cloudlike wood is that which nearThe mountain's side I see appear?O tell me, for I long to know;Its pleasant aspect charms me so.Its glades are full of deer at play,And sweet birds sing on every spray,Past is the hideous wild; I feelSo sweet a tremor o'er me steal,And hail with transport fresh and newA land that is so fair to view.Then tell me all, thou holy Sage,And whose this pleasant hermitageIn which those wicked ones delightTo mar and kill each holy rite.And with foul heart and evil deedThy sacrifice, great Saint, impede.To whom, O Sage, belongs this landIn which thine altars ready stand!'Tis mine to guard them, and to slayThe giants who the rites would stay.All this, O best of saints, I burnFrom thine own lips, my lord, to learn.'

Footnotes
42:1 In Sanskrit Sankára, a word which has various 
significations but the primary meaning of which is the 
act of seizing. A magical power seems to be implied of employing the weapons when and where required. The remarks I have made on the preceding Canto apply with still greater force to this. The MSS. greatly vary in the enumeration of these Sankáras, and it is not surprising that copyists have incorrectly written the names which they did not well understand. The commentators throw no light upon the subject.' SCHLEGEL. I have taken the liberty of omitting four of these which Schlegel translates 'Sclerom* balum, Euomphalium, Cantiventrem, and Chrysomphalum.'
Next: Canto XXXI: The Perfect Hermitage.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXI: THE PERFECT 
HERMITAGE.
Thus spoke the prince of boundless might,
And thus replied the anchorite:'Chief of the mighty arm, of yoreLord Vishnu whom the Gods adore,For holy thought and rites austereOf penance made his dwelling here.This ancient wood was called of oldGrave of the Dwarf, the mighty-souled,And when perfection he attainedThe grove the name of Perfect gained.Bali of yore, Virochan's son,Dominion over Indra won,And when with power his proud heart swelled,O'er the three worlds his empire held.When Bali then began a rite,The Gods and Indra in affrightSought Vishnu in this place of rest,And thus with prayers the God addressed:'Bali, Virochan's mighty son,His sacrifice has now begun:Of boundless wealth, that demon kingIs bounteous to each living thing.

Though suppliants flock from every side
The suit of none is e'er denied.Whate'er, where'er, howe'er the call,He hears the suit and gives to all.Now with thine own illusive artPerform, O Lord, the helper's part:Assume a dwarfish form, and thusFrom fear and danger rescue us.' 
1
Thus in their dread the Immortals sued:The God a dwarflike shape indued: 
2
Before Virochan's son he came,Three steps of land his only claim.The boon obtained, in wondrous wiseLord Vishnu's form increased in size;Through all the worlds, tremendous, vast,God of the Triple Step, he passed. 
3
The whole broad earth from side to sideHe measured with one mighty stride,Spanned with the next the firmament,And with the third through heaven he went.
p. 44
Thus was the king of demons hurledBy Vishnu to the nether world,And thus the universe restoredTo Indra's rule, its ancient lord.And now because the immortal God

This spot in dwarflike semblance trod,
The grove has aye been loved by meFor reverence of the devotee.But demons haunt it, prompt to stayEach holy offering I would pay.Be thine, O lion-lord, to killThese giants that delight in ill.This day, beloved child, our feetShall rest within the calm retreat:And know, thou chief of Raghu's line,My hermitage is also thine.'   He spoke; and soon the anchorite,With joyous looks that beamed delight,With Ráma and his brother stoodWithin the consecrated wood.Soon as they saw the holy man,With one accord together ranThe dwellers in the sacred shade,And to the saint their reverence paid,And offered water for his feet,The gift of honour and a seat;And next with hospitable careThey entertained the princely pair.The royal tamers of their foesRested awhile in sweet repose:Then to the chief of hermits suedStanding in suppliant attitude:'Begin, O best of saints, we pray,Initiatory rites to-day.

This Perfect Grove shall be anew
Made perfect, and thy words be true.'   Then, thus addressed, the holy man,The very glorious sage, beganThe high preliminary rite.Restraining sense and appetite.Calmly the youths that night reposed,And rose when morn her light disclosed,Their morning worship paid, and tookOf lustral water from the brook.Thus purified they breathed the prayer,Then greeted Vis'vamítra whereAs celebrant he sate besideThe flame with sacred oil supplied.
Footnotes
43:1 I omit, after this line, eight s'lokas which, as 
Schlegel allows, are quite out of place.
43:2 This is the fifth of the avatárs, descents or incarnations of Vishnu.
43:3 This is a solar allegory. Vishnu is the sun, the three steps being his rising, culmination, and setting.

Next: Canto XXXII.: Vis'vámitra's Sacrifice.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXII.: VIS'VÁMITRA'S 
SACRIFICE.
That conquering pair, of royal race,
Skilled to observe due time and place,To Kús'ik's hermit son addressed,In timely words, their meet request:'When must we, lord, we pray thee tell,Those Rovers of the Night repel?
Speak, lest we let the moment fly,
And pass the due occasion by.'Thus longing for the strife, they prayed,And thus the hermits answer made:'Till the fifth day be come and past,O Raghu's sons, your watch must last,The saint his Dikshá  
1 has begun,
And all that time will speak to none.'Soon as the steadfast devoteesHad made reply in words like these,The youths began, disdaining sleep,Six days and nights their watch to keep.The warrior pair who tamed the foe,Unrivalled benders of the bow,Kept watch and ward unwearied still

To guard the saint from scathe and ill.
'Twas now the sixth returning day,The hour foretold had past away.Then Ráma cried: 'O Lakshman, nowFirm, watchful, resolute be thou.The fiends as yet have kept afarFrom the pure grove in which we are;Yet waits us, ere the day shall close,Dire battle with the demon foes.'   While thus spoke Ráma borne awayBy longing for the deadly fray,See! bursting from the altar cameThe sudden glory of the flame.Round priest and deacon, and uponGrass, ladles, flowers, the splendour shone,And the high rite, in order due,With sacred texts began anew.But then a loud and fearful roar   Re-echoed through the sky;And like vast clouds that shadow o'er   The heavens in dark July,Involved in gloom of magic might   Two fiends rushed on amain,Máricha, Rover of the Night,   Suváhu, and their train.As on they came in wild career   Thick blood in rain they shed;And Ráma saw those things of fear   Impending overhead.

Then soon as those accursed two
   Who showered down blood be spied,Thus to his brother brave and true   Spoke Ráma lotus-eyed:'Now, Lakshman, thou these fiends shalt see,   Man-eaters, foul of mind,Before my mortal weapon flee   Like clouds before the wind.'He spoke. An arrow, swift as thought,   Upon his bow he pressed,And smote, to utmost fury wrought,   Máricha on the breast.Deep in his flesh the weapon lay   Winged by the mystic spell,
p. 45
And, hurled a hundred leagues away,   In ocean's flood he fell.Then Ráma, when he saw the foe   Convulsed and mad with pain'Neath the chill-pointed weapon's blow,   To Lakshman spoke again:'See, Lakshman, see! this mortal dart   That strikes a numbing chill,Hath struck him senseless with the smart,   But left him breathing still.But these who love the evil way,   And drink the blood they spill,

Rejoicing holy rites to stay,
   Fierce plagues, my hand shall kill.'He seized another shaft, the best,   Aglow with living flame;It struck Suváhu on the chest,   And dead to earth he came.Again a dart, the Wind-God's own,   Upon his string he laid,And all the demons were o'erthrown,   The saints no more afraid.When thus the fiends were slain in fight,Disturbers of each holy rite,Due honour by the saints was paidTo Ráma for his wondrous aid:So Indra is adored when heHas won some glorious victory.Success at last the rite had crowned,And Visvámitra gazed around,And seeing every side at rest,The son of Raghu thus addressed:'My joy, O Prince, is now complete:   Thou hast obeyed my will:Perfect before, this calm retreat   Is now more perfect still.'
Footnotes

44:1 Certain ceremonies preliminary to sacrifice.
Next: Canto XXXIII.: The Sone.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIII.: THE SONE.
Their task achieved, the princes spent
That night with joy and full content.Ere yet the dawn was well displayedTheir morning rites they duly paid,And sought, while yet the light was faint,The hermits and the mighty saint.They greeted first that holy sireResplendent like the burning fire,And then with noble words beganTheir sweet speech to the sainted man:'Here stand, O Lord, thy servants true:Command what thou wouldst have us do.'The saints, by Vis'vámitra led,To Ráma thus in answer said:'Janak the king who rules the landOf fertile Mithilá has plannedA noble sacrifice, and weWill thither go the rite to see.Thou, Prince of men, with us shalt go,And there behold the wondrous bow,Terrific, vast, of matchless might,Which, splendid at the famous rite,The Gods assembled gave the king.No giant, fiend, or God can string

That gem of bows, no heavenly bard:
Then, sure, for man the task were hard.When lords of earth have longed to knowThe virtue of that wondrous bow,The strongest sons of kings in vainHave tried the mighty cord to strain.This famous bow thou there shalt view,And wondrous rites shalt witness too.The high-souled king who lords it o'erThe realm of Mithilá of yoreGained from the Gods this bow, the priceOf his imperial sacrifice.Won by the rite the glorious prizeStill in the royal palace lies,Laid up in oil of precious scentWith aloe-wood and incense blent.'
Then Ráma answering, Be it so,
Made ready with the rest to go.The saint himself was now prepared,But ere beyond the grove he fared,He turned him and in words like theseAddressed the sylvan deities:'Farewell! each holy rite complete,I leave the hermits' perfect seat:To Gangá's northern shore I goBeneath Himálaya's peaks of snow.'With reverent steps he paced aroundThe limits of the holy ground,

And then the mighty saint set forth
And took his journey to the north.His pupils, deep in Scripture's page,Followed behind the holy sage,And servants from the sacred groveA hundred wains for convoy drove.The very birds that winged that air,The very deer that harboured there,Forsook the glade and leafy brakeAnd followed for the hermit's sake.They travelled far, till in the westThe sun was speeding to his rest,And made, their portioned journey o'er,Their halt on S'ona's  
1 distant shore.
The hermits bathed when sank the sun,And every rite was duly done,Oblations paid to Fire, and thenSate round their chief the holy men.Ráma and Lakshman lowly bowedIn reverence to the hermit crowd,And Ráma, having sate him downBefore the saint of pure renown,
p. 46
With humble palms together laidHis eager supplication made:'What country, O my lord, is this,Fair-smiling in her wealth and bliss?

Deign fully. O thou mighty Seer,
To tell me, for I long to hear.'Moved by the prayer of Ráma, heTold forth the country's history.
Footnotes
45:1 A river which rises in Budelcund and falls into the 
Ganges near Patna. It is called also Hiranyabáhu, 
Golden-armed, and Hiranyaváha, Auriferous.
Next: Canto XXXIV.: Brahmadatta.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIV.: BRAHMADATTA.
'A king of Brahmá's seed who bore
The name of Kus'a reigned of yore.Just, faithful to his vows, and true,He held the good in honour due.His bride, a queen of noble name.Of old Vidarbha's  
1 monarchs came.
Like their own father, children four,All valiant boys, the lady bore.In glorious deeds each nerve they strained,And well their Warrior part sustained.To them most just, and true, and brave,Their father thus his counsel gave:"Beloved children, ne'er forgetProtection is a prince's debt:The noble work at once begin,High virtue and her fruits to win."The youths to all the people dear,Received his speech with willing ear;And each went forth his several way,Foundations of a town to lay.Kus'án, a prince of high renown,Was builder of Kaus'ámbí's town,And Kus'anábha, just and wise,Bade high Mahodaya's towers arise.

Amúrtarajas chose to dwell
In Dharmáranya's citadel,And Vasu bade his city fairThe name of Girivraja bear. 
2
This fertile spot whereon we standWas once the high-souled Vasu's land.Behold! as round we turn our eyes,
Five lofty mountain peaks arise.
See! bursting from her parent hill,Sumágadhi, a lovely rill,Bright gleaming as she flows betweenThe mountains, like a wreath is seen,And then through Magadh's plains and grovesWith many a fair mæander roves.And this was Vasu's old domain,The fertile Magadh's broad champaign,Which smiling fields of tilth adornAnd diadem with golden corn.
The queen Ghrítáchí, nymph most fair,
Married to Kus'anábha, bare
A hundred daughters, lovely-faced,
With every charm and beauty graced.
It chanced the maidens, bright and gayAs lightning-flashes on a dayOf rain time, to the garden went
With song and play and merriment,
And there in gay attire they strayed,

And danced, and laughed, and sang, and played.
The God of Wind who roves at willAll places, as he lists, to fill,Saw the young maidens dancing there,Of faultless shape and mien most fair,'I love you all, sweet girls,' he cried,And each shall be my darling bride.Forsake, forsake your mortal lot,And gain a life that withers not.A fickle thing is youth's brief span,And more than all in mortal man.Receive unending youth, and beImmortal, O my loves, with me.'
The hundred girls, to wonder stirred,
The wooing of the Wind-God heard,Laughed, as a jest, his suit aside,And with one voice they thus replied.'O mighty Wind, free spirit whoAll life pervadest, through and through,Thy wondrous power we maidens know;Then wherefore wilt thou mock us so?Our sire is Kus'anábha, King;And we, forsooth, have charms to bringA God to woo us from the skies;But honour first we maidens prize.Far may the hour, we pray, be hence,When we, O thou of little sense,Our truthful father's choice refuse,

And for ourselves our husbands choose.
Our honoured sire our lord we deem,He is to us a God supreme,And they to whom his high decreeMay give us shall our husbands be.'
He heard the answer they returned,
And mighty rage within him burned.On each fair maid a blast he sent:Each stately form be bowed and bent.Bent double by the Wind-God's ireTliey sought the palace of their sire,
p. 47
There fell upon the ground with sighs,While tears and shame were in their eyes.The king himself, with troubled brow,Saw his dear girls so fair but now,A mournful sight all bent and bowed,And grieving thus he cried aloud:'What fate is this, and what the cause!What wretch has scorned all heavenly laws?Who thus your forms could curve and break?You struggle, but no answer make.'
They heard the speech of that wise king
Of their misfortune questioning.Again the hundred maidens sighed,

Touched with their heads his feet, and cried;
'The God of Wind, pervading space,Would bring on us a foul disgrace,And choosing folly's evil wayFrom virtue's path in scorn would stray.But we in words like these reprovedThe God of Wind whom passion moved:'Farewell, O Lord! A sire have we,No women uncontrolled and free.Go, and our sire's consent obtainIf thou our maiden hands wouldst gain.No self-dependent life we live:If we offend, our fault forgive.''But led by folly as a slave,He would not hear the rede we gave,And even as we gently spokeWe felt the Wind-God's crushing stroke.'
The pious king, with grief distressed,
The noble hundred thus addressed:'With patience, daughters, bear your fate,Yours was a deed supremely greatWhen with one mind you kept from shameThe honour of your father's name.Patience, when men their anger vent,Is woman's praise and ornament;Yet when the Gods inflict the blowHard is it to support the woe.Patience, my girls, exceeds all price:

'Tis alms, and truth, and sacrifice.
Patience is virtue, patience fame:Patience upholds this earthly frame.And now, I think, is come the timeTo wed you in jour maiden prime.Now, daughters, go where'er you will:Thoughts for your good my mind shall fill.'
The maidens went, consoled, away:
The best of kings, that very day,Summoned his ministers of stateAbout their marriage to debate.Since then, because the Wind-God bentThe damsels' forms for punishment,That royal town is known to fameBy Kanyákubja's  
1 borrowed name.
There lived a sage called Chúli then,Devoutest of the sons of men;His days in penance rites he spent,A glorious saint, most continent.To him absorbed in tasks austereThe child of Urmilá drew near,Sweet Somadá, the heavenly maid,And lent the saint her pious aid.Long time near him the maiden spent,And served him meek and reverent,Till the great hermit, pleased with her,Thus spoke unto his minister:

'Grateful am I for all thy care:
Blest maiden, speak, thy wish declare.'The sweet-voiced nymph rejoiced to seeThe favour of the devotee,And to that eloquent old man,Most eloquent she thus began:'Thou hast, by heavenly grace sustained,Close union with the Godhead gained.I long, O Saint, to see a sonBy force of holy penance won.Unwed, a maiden life I live:A son to me, thy suppliant, give.'The saint with favour heard her prayer,And gave a son exceeding fair.Him, Chúli's spiritual child,His mother Brahmadatta  
1b styled.
King Brahmadatta, rich and great,In Kámpilí maintained his state,Ruling, like Indra in his bliss,His fortunate metropolis.King Kus'anábha planned that heHis hundred daughters' lord should be.To him, obedient to his call,The happy monarch gave them all.Like Indra then he took the handOf every maiden of the band.Soon as the hand of each young maidIn Brahmadatta's palm was laid,Deformity and cares away,

She shone in beauty bright and gay.
Their freedom from the Wind-God's mightSaw Kus'anábha with delight.Each glance that on their forms he threwFilled him with raptures ever new.Then when the rites were all complete,Witli highest marks of honour meetThe bridegroom with his brides he sentTo his great seat of government.
The nymph received with pleasant speech
Her daughters; and, embracing each,Upon their forms she fondly gazed,And royal Kus'anábha praised.
p. 48
Footnotes
46:1 The modern Berar.
46:2 According to the Bengal recension the first 
(Kus'ámba) is called Kus'ás'va, and his city Kaus'ás'ví. 
This name does not occur elsewhere. The reading of the northern recension is confirmed by *Foê *Kouê Ki; p. 385, where the citv Kiaoshangmi is mentioned. It lay 

500 lis to the south-west of Prayága, on the south bunk 
of the Jumna. Mahodaya is another name of Kanyakubja: Dharmáranya, the wood to which the God of Justice is said to have fled through fear of Soma the Moon-God, was in Magadh. Girivraja w s in the same neighbourhood, See Lasson's I. A. Vol. I, p. 604.
47:1 That is, the City of the Bent Virgins, the modern 
Kanauj or Canouge.
47:1b Literally, Given by Brahma or devout contemplation.
Next: Canto XXXV: Visvámitra's Lineage.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXV: VISVÁMITRA'S LINEAGE.
'The rites were o'er, the maids were wed,
The bridegroom to his home was sped.The sonless monarch bade prepareA sacrifice to gain an heir.Then Kus'a, Brahmá's son, appeared,And thus King Kus'anábha cheered:'Thou shalt, my child, obtain a sonLike thine own self, O holy one.Through him for ever, Gádhi named,Shalt thou in all the worlds be famed.''He spoke, and vanished from the sightTo Brahmá's world of endless light.Time fled, and, as the saint foretold,Gádhi was born, the holy-souled.My sire was he; through him I traceMy line from royal Kus'a's race.My sister--elder-born was she--The pure and good Satyavatí, 
1
Was to the great Richika wed.Still faithful to her husband dead,She followed him, most noble dame,And, raised to heaven in human frame,A pure celestial stream became.Down from Himálaya's snowy height,

In floods for ever fair and bright,
My sister's holy waves are hurledTo purify and glad the world.Now on Himálaya's side I dwellBecause I love my sister well.She, for her faith and truth renowned,Most loving to her husband found,High-fated, firm in each pure vow,Is queen of all the rivers now.Bound by a vow I left her sideAnd to the Perfect convent hied.There, by the aid 'twas thine to lend,Made perfect, all my labours end.Thus, mighty Prince, I now have toldMy race and lineage, high and old,And local tales of long agoWhich thou, O Ráma, fain wouldst know.As I have sate rehearsing thusThe midnight hour is come on us.Now, Ráma, sleep, that nothing mayOur journey of to-morrow stay.No leaf on any tree is stirred:Hushed in repose are beast and bird:
Where'er you turn, on every side,
Dense shades of night the landscape hide,The light of eve is fled: the skies,Thick-studded with their host of eyes,Seem a star-forest overhead,

Where signs and constellations spread.
Now rises, with his pure cold ray,The moon that drives the shades away,And with his gentle influence bringsJoy to the hearts of living things.Now, stealing from their lairs, appearThe beasts to whom the night is dear.Now spirits walk, and every powerThat revels in the midnight hour.'
The mighty hermit's tale was o'er,
He closed his lips and spoke no more.The holy men on every side,'Well done! well done,' with reverence cried;'The mighty men of Kus'a's seedWere ever famed for righteous deed.Like Brahmá's self in glory shineThe high-souled lords of Kus'a's line,And thy great name is sounded most,O Saint, amid the noble host.And thy dear sister--fairest sheOf streams, the high-born Kaus'ikí--Diffusing virtue where she flows,New splendour on thy lineage throws.'Thus by the chief of saints addressedThe son of Gádhi turned to rest;So, when his daily course is done,Sinks to his rest the beaming sun.Ráma with Lakshman, somewhat stirred

To marvel by the tales they heard,
Turned also to his couch, to closeHis eyelids in desired repose.
Footnotes
48:1 Now called Kos'í (Cosy) corrupted from Kaus'ikí, 
daughter of Kus'a. 
'This is one of those personifications of rivers so 
frequent in the Grecian mythology, but in the similar myths is seen the impress of the genius of each people, austere and profoundly religious in India, graceful and devoted to the worship of external beauty in Greece.' GORRESIO.
Next: Canto XXXVI.: The Birth of Gangá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVI.: THE BIRTH OF GANGÁ.
The hours of night now waning fast
On S'ona's pleasant shore they passed.Then, when the dawn began to break,To Ráma thus the hermit spake:'The light of dawn is breaking clear,The hour of morning rites is near,Rise, Ráma, rise, dear son, I pray,And make thee ready for the way.'
Then Ráma rose, and finished all
His duties at the hermit's call,Prepared with joy the road to take,And thus again in question spake:'Here fair and deep the S'ona flows,And many an isle its bosom shows:What way, O Saint, will lead us o'erAnd land us on the farther shore?The saint replied: 'The way I chooseIs that which pious hermits use.'
p. 49
For many a league they journeyed on

Till, when the sun of mid-day shone,
The hermit-haunted flood was seenOf Jáhnaví,  
1 the Rivers' Queen.
Soon as the holy stream they viewed,Thronged with a white-winged multitudeOf sarases  
2 and swans,  3 delight
Possessed them at the lovely sight:And then prepared the hermit bandTo halt upon that holy strand.They bathed as Scripture bids, and paidOblations due to God and shade.To Fire they burnt the offerings meet,And sipped the oil, like Amrit sweet.Then pure and pleased they sate aroundSaint Vis'vámitra on the ground.The holy men of lesser note,In due degree, sate more remote,While Raghu's sons took nearer placeBy virtue of their rank and race.Then Ráma said: 'O Saint, I yearnThe three-pathed Gangá's tale to learn.'
Thus urged, the sage recounted both
The birth of Gangá and her growth:'The mighty hill with metals stored,Himálaya, is the mountains' lord,The father of a lovely pairOf daughters fairest of the fair:Their mother, offspring of the will

Of Meru, everlasting hill,
Mená, Himálaya's darling, gracedWith beauty of her dainty waist.Gangá was elder-born: then cameThe fair one known by Umá's name.Then all the Gods of heaven, in needOf Gangá's help their vows to speed,To great Himálaya came and prayedThe mountain King to yield the maid.He, not regardless of the wealOf the three worlds, with holy zealHis daughter to the Immortals gave,Gangá whose waters cleanse and save,Who roams at pleasure, fair and free,Purging all sinners, to the sea.The three-pathed Gangá thus obtained,The Gods their heavenly homes regained.Long time the sister Umá passedIn vows austere and rigid fast,And the king gave the devoteeImmortal Rudra's  
4 bride to be,
Matching with that unequalled LordHis Umá through the worlds adored.So now a glorious station fills
Each daughter of the King of Hills:
One honoured as the noblest stream,One mid the Goddesses supreme.Thus Gangá, King Himálaya's child,

The heavenly river, undefiled,
Rose bearing with her to the skyHer waves that bless and purify.'
Footnotes
49:1 One of the names of the Ganges considered as the 
daughter of Jahnu. See Canto XLIV.
49:2 The Indian Crane.
49:3 Or, rather, geese.
49:4 A name of the God S'iva.
Next: Canto XXXIX.: The Sons of Sagar.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIX.: THE SONS OF SAGAR.
The saint in accents sweet and clear
Thus told his tale for Ráma's ear,And thus anew the holy manA legend to the prince began:'There reigned a pious monarch o'erAyodhyá in the days of yore:Sagar his name: no child bad he,And children much he longed to see.His honoured consort, fair of face,Sprang from Vidarbha's royal race,Kes'ini, famed from early youthFor piety and love of truth.Arishtanemi's daughter fair,With whom no maiden might compareIn beauty, though the earth is wide,Sumati, was his second bride.With his two queens afar he went,And weary days in penance spent,Fervent, upon Himálaya's hillWhere springs the stream called Bhrigu' rill.Nor did he fail that saint to pleaseWith his devout austerities,And, when a hundred years had fled,Thus the most truthful Bhrigu said:

'From thee, O Sagar, blameless King,
A mighty host of sons shall spring,And thou shalt win a glorious nameWhich none, O Chief, but thou shall claim.One of thy queens a son shall bear,Maintainer of thy race and heir;And of the other there shall beSons sixty thousand born to thee.'
Thus as he spake, with one accord,
To win the grace of that high lord,The queens, with palms together laid,In humble supplication prayed:'Which queen, O Bráhman, of the pair,The many, or the one shall bear?Most eager, Lord, are we to know,And as thou sayest be it so.'
 
1b
p. 50
With his sweet speech the saint replied:
'Yourselves, O Queens, the choice decide.Your own discretion freely useWhich shall the one or many choose:One shall the race and name uphold,The host be famous, strong, and bold.Which will have which?' Then Kes'inî

The mother of one heir would be.
Sumati, sister of the king  1
Of all the birds that ply the wing,To that illustrious Bráhman suedThat she might bear the multitudeWhose fame throughout the world should soundFor mighty enterprise renowned.Around the saint the monarch went,Bowing his head, most reverent.Then with his wives, with willing feet,Besought his own imperial seat.Time passed. The elder consort bareA son called Asamanj, the heir.Then Sumati, the younger, gaveBirth to a gourd,  
2 O hero brave,
Whose rind, when burst and cleft in two,Gave sixty thousand babes to view.All these with care the nurses laidIn jars of oil; and there they stayed,Till, youthful age and strength complete,Forth speeding from each dark retreat,All peers in valour, years, and might,The sixty thousand came to light.Prince Asamanj, brought up with care,Scourge of his foes, was made the heir.But liegemen's boys he used to castTo Sarjû's waves that hurried past,Laughing the while in cruel gleeTheir dying agonies to see.

This wicked prince who aye withstood
The counsel of the wise and good,Who plagued the people in his hate,His father banished from the state.His son, kind-spoken, brave, and tall,Was Ans'uman, beloved of all.   Long years flew by. The king decreedTo slay a sacrificial steed.Consulting with his priestly bandHe vowed the rite his soul had planned,And, Veda skilled, by their adviceMade ready for the sacrifice.
Footnotes
49:1b I am compelled to omit Cantos XXXVII and 
XXXVIII, THE GLORY OF UMÀ, and THE BIRTH 
OF KÁRTIKEYA, as both in subject and language offensive to modern taste. They will be found in Schlegel's Latin translation.
Next: Canto XL.: The Cleaving of The Earth.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XL.: THE CLEAVING OF THE 
EARTH.
The hermit ceased: the tale was done:
Then in a transport Raghu's son
Again addressed the ancient sire
Resplendent as a burning fire:'O holy man, I fain would hearThe tale repeated full and clearHow he from whom my sires descendBrought the great rite to happy end.'The hermit answered with a smile:'Then listen, son of Raghu, whileMy legendary tale proceedsTo tell of high-souled Sagar's deeds.Within the spacious plain that liesFrom where Himálaya's heights ariseTo where proud Vindhya's rival chainLooks down upon the subject plain--A land the best for rites declared-- 
1b
His sacrifice the king prepared.And Ans'umán the prince--for soSagar advised--with ready bowWas borne upon a mighty car

To watch the steed who roamed afar.
But Indra, monarch of the skies,Veiling his form in demon guise,Came down upon the appointed dayAnd drove the victim horde away.Reft of the steed the priests, distressed,The master of the rite addressed;'Upon the sacred day by forceA robber takes the victim horse.Haste, King! now let the thief be slain;Bring thou the charger back again:The sacred rite prevented thusBrings scathe and woe to all of us.Rise, monarch, and provide with speed.That naught its happy course impede.'   King Sagar in his crowded courtGave ear unto the priests' report.He summoned straightway to his sideHis sixty thousand sons, and cried:'Brave sons of mine, I knew not howThese demons are so mighty now:The priests began the rite so wellAll sanctified with prayer and spell.If in the depths of earth he hide,Or lurk beneath the ocean's tide,
p. 51
Pursue, dear sons, the robber's track;

Slay him and bring the charger back.
The whole of this broad earth explore,Sea-garlanded, from shore to shore:Yea, dig her up with might and mainUntil you see the horse again.Deep let your searching labour reach,A league in depth dug out by each.The robber of our horse pursue,And please your sire who orders you.My grandson, I, this priestly train,Till the steed comes, will here remain.'   Their eager hearts with transport burnedAs to their task the heroes turned.Obedient to their father, theyThrough earth's recesses forced their way.With iron arms' unflinching toilEach dug a league beneath the soil.Earth, cleft asunder, groaned in pain,As emulous they plied amainSharp-pointed coulter, pick, and bar,Hard as the bolts of Indra are.Then loud the horrid clamour roseOf monsters dying 'neath their blows,Giant and demon, fiend and snake,That in earth's core their dwelling make.They dug, in ire that naught could stay,Through sixty thousand leagues their way,Cleaving the earth with matchless strengthTill hell itself they reached at length.

Thus digging searched they Jambudvip  1
With all its hills and mountains steep.
Then a great fear began to shakeThe heart of God, bard, fiend, and snake,And all distressed in spirit wentBefore the Sire Omnipotent.With signs of woe in every faceThey sought the mighty Father's grace,And trembling still and ill at easeAddressed their Lord in words like these:'The sons of Sagar, Sire benign,Pierce the whole earth with mine on mine,And as their ruthless work they plyInnumerable creatures die,'This is the thief,' the princes say,'Who stole our victim steed away.This marred the rite, and caused us ill.And so their guiltless blood they spill.'
Footnotes
50:1 Garuda.
50:2 Ikshváku, the name of a king of Ayodhyá who is 
regarded as the founder of the Solar race, means also a 
gourd. Hence, perhaps, the myth.

50:1b The region here spoken of is called in the Laws of 
Manu Madhyades'a or the middle region. 'The region 
situated between the Himálaya and the Vindhya Mountains ... is called Madhyades'a, or the middle region; the space comprised between these two mountains from the eastern to the western sea is called by sages Áryávartta, the seat of honourable men.' (MANU, II, 21, 22.) The Sanskrit Indians called themselves Áryans, which means honourable, noble, to distinguish themselves from the surrounding nations of different origin.' GORRESIO.
Next: Canto XLI.: Kapil.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLI.: KAPIL.
The father lent a gracious ear
And listened to their tale of fear,
And kindly to the Gods replied
Whom woe and death had terrified;'The wisest Vasudeva, 
1b who
The Immortals' foe, fierce Madhu, slew,Regards broad Earth with love and prideAnd guards, in Kapil's form, his bride. 
2b
His kindled wrath will quickly fallOn the king's sons and burn them all.This cleaving of the earth his eyeForesaw in ages long gone by:He knew with prescient soul the fateThat Sagar's children should await.'   The Three-and-thirty, 
3b freed from fear.
Sought their bright homes with hopeful cheer.Still rose the great tempestuous soundAs Sagar's children pierced the ground.When thus the whole broad earth was cleft,And not a spot unsearched was left,Back to their home the princes sped,And thus unto their father said:

'We searched the earth from side to side,
While countless hosts of creatures died.Our conquering feet in triumph trodOn snake and demon, fiend and God;But yet we failed, with all our toil,To find the robber and the spoil.What can we more? If more we can,Devise, O King, and tell thy plan.'   His chidren's speech King Sagar heard,And answered thus, to anger stirred:'Dig on, and ne'er your labour stayTill through earth's depths you force your way.Then smite the robber dead, and bringThe charger back with triumphing.'
p. 52
   The sixty thousand chiefs obeyed:Deep through the earth their way they made.Deep as they dug and deeper yetThe immortal elephant they met,Famed Virúpáksha  
1 vast of size,
Upon whose head the broad earth lies:The mighty beast who earth sustainsWith shaggy hills and wooded plains.When, with the changing moon, distressed,And longing for a moment's rest,His mighty head the monster shakes,Earth to the bottom reels and quakes.

Around that warder strong and vast
With reverential steps they passed.Nor, when the honour due was paid,Their downward search through earth delayed.But turning from the east asideSouthward again their task they plied.There Mahápadma held his place,The best of all his mighty race,Like some huge hill, of monstrous girth,Upholding on his head the earth.When the vast beast the princes saw,They marvelled and were tilled with awe.The sons of high-souled Sagar roundThat elephant in reverence wound.Then in the western region theyWith might unwearied cleft their way.There saw they with astonisht eyesSaumanas, beast of mountain size.Round him with circling steps they wentWith greetings kind and reverent.   On, on--no thought of rest or stay--They reached the seat of Soma's sway.There saw they Bhadra, white as snow,With lucky marks that fortune show,Bearing the earth upon his head.Round him they paced with solemn tread,
And honoured him with greetings kind,
Then downward yet their way they mined.

They gained the tract 'twixt east and north
Whose fame is ever blazoned forth, 1b
And by a storm of rage impelled,Digging through earth their course they held.   Then all the princes, lofty-souled,Of wondrous vigour, strong and bold,Saw Vásudeva  
2b standing there
In Kapil's form he loved to wear,And near the everlasting GodThe victim charger cropped the sod.They saw with joy and eager eyesThe fancied robber and the prize,And on him rushed the furious bandCrying aloud, Stand, villain! stand!'Avaunt! avaunt!' great Kapil cried,His bosom flusht with passion's tide;Then by his might that proud arrayAll scorcht to heaps of ashes lay. 
3b
Footnotes
51:1 Said to be so called from the Jambu, or Rose 
Apple, abounding in it, and signifying according to the 
Purána, the central division of the world, the known world.

51:1b Here used as a name of Vishnu.
51:2b Kings are called the husbands of their kingdoms 
or of the earth; 'She and his kingdom were his only 
brides.' Raghuvans'a. 
  'Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate   A double marriage, 'twixt my crown and me,   And then between me and my married wife.'                         King Richard II. Act V. Sc. I.
51:3b The thirty-three Gods are said in the Aitareya. 
Bráhmana.Book 1. ch. II. 10. to be the eight Vasus, the 
eleven Rudras, the twelve Àdityas, Prajápati, either Brahmá or Daksha, and Vashatkára or deitied oblation. This must have been the actual number at the beginning of the Vedic religion gradually increased by successive mythical and religious creations till the Indian Pantheon was crowded with abstractions of every kind. Through the reverence with which the words of the Veda were regarded, the immense host of multiplied divinities, in later times, still bore the name of the Thirty-three Gods.
52:1 'One of the elephants which, according to an 
ancient belief popular in India, supported the earth with 
their enormous backs; when one of these elephants shook his wearied head the earth trembled with its 

woods and hills. An idea, or rather a mythical fancy, 
similar to this, but reduced to proportions less grand, is found in Virgil when he speaks of Enceladus buried under Ætna: 
  'Fama est Enceladi semiustum fulmine corpus   Urgeri molo haec, ingentemque insuper Ætnam   Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis;   Et fessum quoties mutat latus, intremere omnem   Murmure Trinacriam, et coelum subtexere fumo.'
                                 Æneid. Lib, III. GORRESIO. 
Next: Canto XLII.: Sagar's Sacrifice.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLII.: SAGAR'S SACRIFICE.
Then to the prince his grandson, bright
With his own fame's unborrowed light,King Sagar thus began to say,Marvelling at his sons' delay:'Thou art a warrior skilled and bold,Match for the mighty men of old.Now follow on thine uncles' courseAnd track the robber of the horse.
p. 53
To guard thee take thy sword and bow,for huge and strong are beasts below.There to the reverend reverence pay,And kill the foes who check thy way;Then turn successful home and seeMy sacrifice complete through thee.'
Obedient to the high-souled lord
Grasped Ans'umán his bow and sword,Aud hurried forth the way to traceWith youth and valour's eager pace.On sped he by the path he found

Dug by his uncles underground,
The warder elephant he sawWhose size and strength pass Nature's law,Who bears the world's tremendous weight,Whom God, fiend, giant venerate,Bird, serpent, and each flitting shade.To him the honour meet he paidWith circling steps and greeting due,And further prayed him, if he knew,To tell him of his uncles' weal,And who had dared the horse to steal.To him in war and council triedThe warder elephant replied:'Thou, son of Asamanj, shalt leadIn triumph back the rescued steed.'
As to each warder beast he came
And questioned all, his words the same,The honoured youth with gentle speechDrew eloquent reply from each,That fortune should his steps attend.And with the horse he home should wend.Cheered with the grateful answer, hePassed on with step more light and free,And reached with careless heart the placeWhere lay in ashes Sagar's race.Then sank the spirit of the chiefBeneath that shock of sudden grief,And with a bitter cry of woe

He mourned his kinsmen fallen so.
He saw, weighed down by woe and care,The victim charger roaming there.Yet would the pious chieftain fainOblations offer to the slain:But, needing water for the rite,He looked and there was none in sight.His quick eye searching all aroundThe uncle of his kinsmen found,King Garud, best beyond compareOf birds who wing the fields of air.Then thus unto the weeping manThe son of Vinatá  
1 began:
Grieve not, O hero, for their fallWho died a death approved of all.Of mighty strength, they met their fateBy Kapil's hand whom none can mate.Pour forth for them no earthly wave,
A holier flood their spirits crave.
If, daughter of the Lord of Snow,Gangá would turn her stream below,Her waves that cleanse all mortal stainWould wash their ashes pure again.Yea, when her flood whom all revereRolls o'er the dust that moulders here,The sixty thousand, freed from sin,A home in Indra's heaven shall win.Go, and with ceaseless labour try

To draw the Goddess from the sky.
Return, and with thee take the steed;So shall thy grandsire's rite succeed.'
Prince Ans'umán the strong and brave
Followed the rede Suparna  
1b gave.
The glorious hero took the horse,And homeward quickly bent his course.Straight to the anxious king he hied,Whom lustral rites had purified,The mournful story to unfoldAnd all the king of birds had told.The tale of woe the monarch heard,Nor longer was the rite deterred:With care and just observance heAccomplished all, as texts decree.The rites performed, with brighter fame,Mighty in counsel, home he came.He longed to bring the river down,But found no plan his wish to crown.He pondered long with anxious thoughtBut saw no way to what he sought.Thus thirty thousand years he spent,And then to heaven the monarch went.
Footnotes

52:1b 'The Devas and Asuras (Gods and Titans) fought 
in the east, the south, the west, and the north, and the 
Devas were defeated by the Asuras in all these directions. They then fought in the north-eastern direction; there the Devas did not sustain defeat. This direction is aparájitá, i. e. unconquerable. Thence one should do work in this direction, and have it done there; for such a one '(alone) is able to clear off his debts.' HAUG'S Aitareyaya Bráhmanam, Vol. II, p. 33. 
The debts here spoken of are a man's religious 
obligations to the Gods, the Pitaras or Manes, and men.
52:2b Vishnu.
52:3b 'It appears to me that this mythical story has 
reference to the volcanic phenomena of nature. Kapil 
may very possibly be that hidden fiery force which suddenly unprisons itself and bursts forth in volcanic effects. Kapil is, moreover, one of the names of Agni the God of Fire.' GORRESIO.
53:1 Garud was the son of Kas'yap and Vinatá.
Next: Canto XLIII.: Bhagirath.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIII.: BHAGIRATH.
When Sagar thus had bowed to fate,
The lords and commons of the stateApproved with ready heart and willPrince Ans'umán his throne to fill.He ruled, a mighty king, unblamed,Sire of Dilípa justly famed.To him. his child and worthy heir,The king resigned his kingdom's care,And on Himálaya's pleasant sideHis task austere of penance plied.Bright as a God in clear renownHe planned to bring pure Gangá down.There on his fruitless hope intentTwice sixteen thousand years he spent,And in the grove of hermits stayedTill bliss in heaven his rites repaid.Dilípa then, the good and great,Soon as he learnt his kinsmen's fate,Bowed down by woe, with troubled mind,
p. 54
Pondering long no cure could find.'How can I bring,' the mourner sighed,

'To cleanse their dust, the heavenly tide?
How can I give them rest, and saveTheir spirits with the offered wave?'Long with this thought his bosom skilledIn holy discipline was filled.A son was born, Bhagirath named,Above all men for virtue famed.Dilipa many a rite ordained,And thirty thousand seasons reigned.But when no hope the king could seeHis kinsmen from their woe to free,The lord of men, by sickness tried,Obeyed the law of fate, and died;He left the kingdom to his son,And gained the heaven his deeds had won.The good Bhagirath, royal sage.Had no fair son to cheer his age.He, great in glory, pure in will,Longing for sons was childless still.Then on one wish, one thought intent,Planning the heavenly stream's descent,Leaving his ministers the careAnd burden of his state to bear,Dwelling in far Gokarna  
1 he
Engaged in long austerity.With senses checked, with arms upraised,Five fires  
2 around and o'er him blazed.
Each weary month the hermit passedBreaking but once his awful fast.

In winter's chill the brook his bed,
In rain, the clouds to screen his head.Thousands of years he thus enduredTill Brahmá's favour was assured,And the high Lord of living thingsLooked kindly on his sufferings.With trooping Gods the Sire came nearThe king who plied his task austere:'Blest Monarch, of a glorious race,Thy fervent rites have won my grace.Well hast thou wrought thine awful task:Some boon in turn, O Hermit, ask.'
Bhagirath, rich in glory's light,
The hero with the arm of might,Thus to the Lord of earth and skyRaised suppliant hands and made reply:'If the great God his favour deigns,And my long toil its fruit obtains,Let Sagar's sons receive from meLibations that they long to see.Let Gangá with her holy waveThe ashes of the heroes lave,That so my kinsmen may ascendTo heavenly bliss that ne'er shall end.And give, I pray, O God, a son,Nor let my house be all undone.
Sire of the worlds! be this the grace

Bestowed upon Ikshváku's race.'
The Sire, when thus the king had prayed,
In sweet kind words his answer made.'High, high thy thought and wishes are,Bhagirath of the mighty car!Ikshváku's line is blest in thee,And as thou prayest it shall be.Gangá, whose waves in Swarga  
1b flow,
Is daughter of the Lord of Snow.Win S'iva that his aid be lentTo hold her in her mid descent,For earth alone will never bearThose torrents hurled from upper air;And none may hold her weight but He,The Trident wielding deity.'Thus having said, the Lord supremeAddressed him to the heavenly stream;And then with Gods and Maruts  
2b went
To heaven above the firmament.
Footnotes
53:1b Garud.
54:1 A famous and venerated region near the Malabar 

coast.
54:2 That is four fires and the sun.
Next: Canto XLIV.: The Descent of Gangà.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIV.: THE DESCENT OF 
GANGÀ.
The Lord of life the skies regained:
The fervent king a year remainedWith arms upraised, refusing restWhile with one toe the earth he pressed,Still as a post, with sleepless eye,The air his food, his roof the sky.Tho year had past. Then Umá's lord,  
3b
King of creation, world adored,Thus spoke to great Bhagirath: 'IWell pleased thy wish will gratify,And on my head her waves shalll flingThe daughter of the Mountains' King!He stood upon the lofty crest   That crowns the Lord of Snow,And bade the river of the Blest   Descend on earth below.Himálaya's child, adored of all,   The haughty mandate heard,And her proud bosom, at the call,   With furious wrath was stirred.Down from her channel in the skies   With awful might she sped

With a giant's rush, in a giant's size.
   On S'iva's holy head.'He calls me,' in her wrath she cried,   'And all my flood shall sweepAnd whirl him in its whelming tide   To hell's profoundest deep.He held tne river on his head,   And kept her wandering, where,Dense as Himalaya's woods, were spread   The tangles of his hair.
p. 55
No way to earth she found, ashamed,   Though long and sore she strove,Condemned, until her pride were tamed,   Amid his locks to rove.There, many lengthening seasons through,   The wildered river ran:Bhagirath saw it, and anew   His penance dire began.Then S'iva, for the hermit's sake,   Bade her long wanderings end,And sinking into Vindu's lake   Her weary waves descend.From Gangá, by the God set free,   Seven noble rivers came;Hládiní, Pávaní, and she   Called Naliní by name:

These rolled their lucid waves along
   And sought the eastern side.Suchakshu, Sítá fair and strong,   And Sindhu's mighty tide--  
1
These to the region of the west   With joyful waters sped:The seventh, the brightest and the best,   Flowed where Bhagírath led.On S'iva's head descending first   A rest the torrents found:Then down in all their might they burst   And roared along the ground.On countless glittering scales the beam   Of rosy morning flashed,Where flsh and dolphins through the stream   Fallen and falling dashed.Then bards who chant celestial lays   And nymphs of heavenly birthFlocked round upon that flow to gaze   That streamed from sky and earth.The Gods themselves from every sphere,   Incomparably bright,Borne in their golden cars drew near   To see the wondrous sight.The cloudless sky was all aflame   With the light of a hundred sunsWhere'er the shining chariots came   That bore those holy ones.So flashed the air with crested snakes

   And fish of every hue
As when the lightning's glory breaks   Through fields of summer blue.And white foam-clouds and silver spray   Were wildly tossed on high,Like swans that urge their homeward way   Across the autumn sky.Now ran the river calm and clear   With current strong and deep:
Now slowly broadened to a mere,
   Or scarcely seemed to creep.Now o'er a length of sandy plain   Her tranquil course she held:Now rose her waves and sank again,   By refluent waves repelled.So falling first on S'iva's head,Thence rushing to their earthly bed,In ceaseless fall the waters streamed,And pure with holy lustre gleamed.Then every spirit, sage, and bard,Condemned to earth by sentence hard,Pressed eagerly around the tideThat S'iva's touch had sanctified.Then they whom heavenly doom had hurled,Accursed, to this lower world,Touched the pure wave, and freed from sinResought the skies and entered inAnd all the world was glad, whereon

The glorious water flowed and shone,
For sin and stain were banished thenceBy the sweet river's influence.First, in a car of heavenly frame,The royal saint of deathless name,Bhagírath, very glorious rode,And after him fair Gangá flowed.God, sage, and bard, the chief in placeOf spirits and the Nága race,Nymph, giant, fiend, in long arraySped where Bhagírath led the way;And all the hosts the flood that swimFollowed the stream that followed him.Where'er the great Bhagírath led,There ever glorious Gangá fled,The best of floods, the rivers' queen,Whose waters wash the wicked clean.   It chanced that Jahnu, great and good,Engaged with holy offering stood;The river spread her waves aroundFlooding his sacrificial ground.The saint in anger marked her pride,And at one draught her stream he dried.Then God, and sage, and bard, afraid,To noble high-souled Jahnu prayed,And begged that he would kindly deemHis own dear child that holy stream.Moved by their suit, he soothed their fearsAnd loosed her waters from his ears.

Hence Gangá through the world is styled
Both Jáhnavi and Jahnu's child.Then onward still she followed fast,And reached the great sea bank at last.Thence deep below her way she madeTo end those rites so long delayed.The monarch reached the Ocean's side,And still behind him Gangá hied.He sought the depths which open layWhere Sagar's sons had dug their way.So leading through earth's nether cavesThe river's purifying waves.
p. 56
Over his kinsmen's dust the lordHis funeral libation poured.Soon as the flood their dust bedewed,Their spirits gained beatitude,And all in heavenly bodies dressedRose to the skies' eternal rest.
Then thus to King Bhagírath said
Brahmá, when, coming at the headOf all his bright celestial train,He saw those spirits freed from stain:'Well done! great Prince of men, well done!Thy kinsmen bliss and heaven have won.The sons of Sagar mighty-souled,

Are with the Blest, as Gods, enrolled,
Long as the Ocean's flood shall standUpon the border of the land,So long shall Sagar's sons remain,And, godlike, rank in heaven retain.Gangá thine eldest child shall be.Called from thy name Bhágirathí;Named also--for her waters fellFrom heaven and flow through earth and hell--Tripathagá, stream of the skies.Because three paths she glorifies,And, mighty King, 'tis given thee nowTo free thee and perform thy vow.No longer, happy Prince, delayDrink-offerings to thy kin to pay,For this the holiest Sagar sighed,But mourned the boon he sought denied.Then Ans'umán, dear Prince! althoughNo brighter name the world could show,Strove long the heavenly flood to gainTo visit earth, but strove in vain.Nor was she by the sages' peer,Blest with all virtues, most austere,Thy sire Dilipa, hither brought,Though with fierce prayers the boon he sought.But thou, O King, earned success,And won high fame which God will bless.Through thee, O victor of thy foes,On earth this heavenly Gangá flows,

And thou hast gained the meed divine
That waits on virtue such as thine.Now in her ever holy waveThyself, O best of heroes, lave:So shalt thou, pure from every sin,The blessed fruit of merit win.Now for thy kin who died of yoreThe meet libations duly pour.Above the heavens I now ascend:Depart, and bliss thy steps attend.'
Thus to the mighty king who broke
Hie foemens' might, Lord Brahmá spoke,And with his Gods around him roseTo his own heaven of blest repose.The royal sage no more delayed,
But, the libation duly paid,
Home to his regal city hiedWith water cleansed and purified.There ruled he his ancestral state,Best of all men, most fortunate.And all the people joyed againIn good Bhagírath's gentle reign.Rich, prosperous, and blest were they,And grief and sickness fled away.Thus, Ráma, I at length have toldHow Gangá came from heaven of old.Now, for the evening passes swift,

I wish thee each auspicious gift.
This story of the flood's descentWill give--for' tis most excellent--Wealth, purity, fame, length of days,And to the skies its hearers raise.'
Footnotes
54:1b Heaven.
54:2b Wind-Gods.
54:3b S'iva.
55:1 The lake Vindu does not exist. Of the seven rivers 
here mentioned two only, the Ganges and the Sindhu or 
Indus, are known to geographers. Hládiní means the Gladdener, Pávaní the Purifier, Naliní the Lotus-Clad, and Suchakshu the Fair-eyed.
Next: Canto XLV.: The Quest of The Amrit.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLV.: THE QUEST OF THE 
AMRIT.
High and more high their wonder rose
As the strange story reached its close,And thus, with Lakshman, Ráma, bestOf Raghu's sons, the saint addressed:'Most wondrous is the tale which thouHast told of heavenly Gangá, howFrom realms above descending sheFlowed through the land and filled the sea.In thinking o'er what thou hast saidThe night has like a moment fled,Whose hours in musing have been spentUpon thy words most excellent:So much, O holy Sage, thy loreHas charmed us with this tale of yore.'
Day dawned. The morning rites were done
And the victorious Raghu's sonAddressed the sage in words like these,Rich in his long austerities:'The night is past: the morn is clear;Told is the tale so good to hear:Now o'er that river let us go,

Three-pathed, the best of all that flow.
This boat stands ready on the shoreTo bear the holy hermits o'er,Who of thy coming warned, in haste,The barge upon the bank have placed.'
And Kas'ik's son approved his speech,
And moving to the sandy beach,Placed in the boat the hermit band,And reached the river's further strand.On the north bank their feet they set,And greeted all the (illegible) they met.On Gangá's shore they lighted down,And saw Vis'ada's lovely town.Thither, the princes by his side,The best of holy hermits hied.It was a town exceeding fair
p. 57
That might with heaven itself compare.Then, suppliant palm to palm applied,Famed Ráma asked his holy guide:'O best of hermits, say what raceOf monarchs rules this lovely place.Dear master, let my prayer prevail,For much I long to hear the tale.'Moved by his words, the saintly manVis'álá's ancient tale began:

'List, Rama, list, with closest heed
The tale of Indra's wondrous deed,And mark me as I truly tellWhat here in ancient days befell.Ere Krita's famous Age 
1 had fled.
Strong were the sons of Diti 2 bred;
And Aditi's brave children tooWere very mighty, good, and true.The rival brothers fierce and boldWere sons of Kas'yap lofty-souled.Of sister mothers born, they vied,Brood against brood, in jealous pride.Once, as they say, band met with band,And, joined in awful council, plannedTo live, unharmed by age and time,Immortal in their youthful prime.Then this was, after due debate,The counsel of the wise and great,To churn with might the milky sea 
3
The life-bestowing drink to free.This planned, they seized the Serpent King,Vásuki, for their churning-string,And Mandar's mountain for their pole,And churned with all their heart and soul.As thus, a thousand seasons through,This way and that the snake they drew,Biting the rocks, each tortured head,A very deadly venom shed.Thence, bursting like a mighty flame,

A pestilential poison came,
Consuming, as it onward ran,The home of God, and fiend, and man.Then all the suppliant Gods in fearTo S'ankar 
4, mighty lord, drew near.
To Rudra, King of Herds, dismayed,'Save us, O save us, Lord!' they prayed.Then Vishnu, bearing shell, and mace,And discus, showed his radiant face,And thus addressed in smiling gleeThe Trident wielding deity:What treasure first the Gods upturnFrom troubled Ocean, as they churn,Should--for thou art the eldest--beConferred, O best of Gods, on thee.
Then come, and for thy birthright's sake,
This venom as thy firstfruits take.'He spoke, and vanished from their sight.When Siva saw their wild affright,And heard his speech by whom is borneThe mighty bow of bending horn, 
1b
The poisoned flood at once he quaffedAs 'twere the Amrit's heavenly draught.Then from the Gods departing wentS'iva, the Lord pre-eminent.The host of Gods and Asurs stillKept churning with one heart and will.But Mandar's mountain, whirling round.

Pierced to the depths below the ground.
Then Gods and bards in terror flewTo him who mighty Madhu slew.'Help of all beings! more than all,The Gods on thee for aid may call.Ward off, O mighty-armed! our fate,And bear up Mandar's threatening weight.'Then Vishnu, as their need was sore,The semblance of a tortoise wore,And in the bed of Ocean layThe mountain on his back to stay.Then he, the soul pervading all,Whose locks in radiant tresses fall,One mighty arm extended still,And grasped the summit of the hill.So ranged among the Immortals, heJoined in the churning of the sea.
A thousand years had reached their close,
When calmly from the ocean roseThe gentle sage 
2b with staff and can,
Lord of the art of healing man.Then as the waters foamed and boiled.As churning still the Immortals toiled,Of winning face and lovely frame,Forth sixty million fair ones came.Born of the foam and water, theseWere aptly named Apsarases. 
3b

p. 58
Each had her maids. The tongue would fail--
So vast the throng--to count the tale,But when no God or Titan wooedA wife from all that multitude,Refused by all, they gave their loveIn common to the Gods above.Then from the sea still vext and wildRose Surá, 
1 Varun's maiden child.
A fitting match she sought to find:But Diti's sons her love declined.Their kinsmen of the rival broodTo the pure maid in honour sued.Hence those who loved that nymph so fairThe hallowed name of Suras bear.And Asurs are the Titan crowdHer gentle claims who disallowed.Then from the foamy sea was freedUchchaihs'ravas, 
2 the generous steed,
And Kaustubha, of gems the gem, 3
And Soma, Moon God, after them.
At length when many a year had fled,
Up floated, on her lotus bed,A maiden fair and tender-eyed,In the young flush of beauty's pride.She shone with pearl and golden sheen,And seals of glory stamped her queen.

On each round arm glowed many a gem,
On her smooth brows, a diadem,Rolling in waves beneath her crownThe glory of her hair flowed down.Pearls on her neck of price untold,The lady shone like burnisht gold.Queen of the Gods, she leapt to land,A lotus in her perfect hand,
And fondly, of the lotus-sprung,
To lotus-bearing Vishnu clung.Her Gods above and men belowAs Beauty's Queen and Fortune know. 
1b
Gods, Titans, and the minstrel trainStill churned and wrought the troubled main.At length the prize so madly sought,The Amrit, to their sight was brought.For the rich spoil,'twixt these and thoseA fratricidal war arose,And, host 'gainst host in battle, set,Aditi's sons and Diti's met.United, with the giants' aid,Their fierce attack the Titans made,And wildly raged for many a dayThat universe-astounding fray.When wearied arms were faint to strike,And ruin threatened all alike,Vishnu, with art's illusive aid,The Amrit from their sight conveyed.

That Best of Beings smote his foes
Who dared his deathless arm oppose:Yea, Vishnu, all-pervading God,Beneath his feet the Titans trodAditi's race, the sons of light,slew Diti's brood in cruel fight.Then town-destroying 
2b Indra gained
His empire, and in glory reignedO'er the three worlds with bard and sageRejoicing in his heritage.
Footnotes
57:1 The first or Golden Age.
57:2 Diti and Aditi were wives of Kas'yap, and mothers 
respectively of Titans and Gods.
57:3 One of the seven seas surrounding as many worlds in concentric rings.
57:4 S'ankar and Rudra are names of S'iva.
57:1b S'árigin, literally carrying a bow of horn, is a constantly recurring name of Vishnu. The Indians also, 

therefore, knew the art of making bows out of the hons 
of antelopes or wild goats, which Homer ascribes to the Trojans of the heroic age.' SCHLEGEL.
57:2b Dhanvantari, the physician of the Gods.
57:3b The poet plays upon the word and fancifully 
derives it from apsu, the locative case plural of ap, 
water, and rasa, taste.... The word is probably derived from ap, water, and sri, to go, and seems to signify inhabitants of the water, nymphs of the stream; or, as Goldstücker thinks (Dict. s.v.) these divinities were originally personifications of the vapours which are attracted by the sun and form into mist or clouds.
58:1 'Surá, the feminine comprehends all sorts of 
intoxicating liquors, many kinds of which the Indians 
from the earliest times distilled and prepared from rice, sugar-cane, the palm tree, and various flowers and plants. Nothing is considered more disgraceful among orthodox Hindus than drunkenness, and the use of wine is forbidden not only to Bráhmans but the two other orders as well.... So it clearly appears derogatory to the dignity of the Gods to have received a nymph so pernicious, who ought rather to have been made over to the Titans. However the etymological fancy has prevailed. The word Sura, a God, is derived from the indeclinable Svar heaven.' SCHLEGEL.

58:2 Literally, high-eared, the horse of Indra. Compare 
the production of the horse from the sea by Neptune.
58:3 
     'And Kaustubha the best
   Of gems that burns with living light   Upon Lord Vishnu's breast.'                  Churning of the Ocean.
Next: Canto XLVI.: Diti's Hope.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVI.: DITI'S HOPE.
But Diti, when her sons were slain,
Wild with a childless mother's pain.To Kas'yap spake, Marícha's son,Her husband: 'O thou glorious one!
p. 59
Dead are the children, mine no more,The mighty sons to thee I bore.Long fervour's meed, I crave a boyWhose arm may Indra's life destroy.The toil and pain my care shall be:To bless my hope depends on thee.Give me a mighty son to slayFierce Indra, gracious lord, I pray.'
Then glorious Kas'yap thus replied
To Diti, as she wept and sighed:'Thy prayer is heard, dear saint! RemainPure from all spot, and thou shalt gainA son whose arm shall take the lifeOf Indra in the battle strife.For full a thousand years endure

Free from all stain, supremely pure;
Then shall thy son and mine appear,Whom the three worlds shall serve with fear.'These words the glorious Kas'yap said,Then gently stroked his consort's head,Blessed her, and bade a kind adieu,And turned him to his rites anew.Soon as her lord had left her side,Her bosom swelled with joy and pride.She sought the shade of holy boughs,And there began her awful vows.While yet she wrought her rites austere,Indra, unbidden, hastened near,With sweet observance tending her,A reverential minister.Wood, water, fire, and grass he brought,Sweet roots and woodland fruit he sought,And all her wants, the Thousand-eyed,With never-failing care, supplied,With tender love and soft caressRemoving pain and weariness.
When, of the thousand years ordained,
Ten only unfulfilled remained,Thus to her son, the Thousand-eyed,The Goddess in her triumph cried:'Best of the mighty! there remainBut ten short years of toil and pain;These years of penance soon will flee,

And a new brother thou shalt see.
Him for thy sake I'll nobly breed,And lust of war his soul shall feed;Then free from care and sorrow thouShalt see the worlds before him bow.' 
1
Footnotes
58:1b 'That this story of the birth of Lakshimi is of 
considerable antiquity is evident from one of her names 
*Kshirábdhi-tanayá, daughter of the Milky Sea, which is found in Amarasinha the most ancient of Indian lexicographers. The similarity to the Greek myth of Venus being born from the foam of the sea is remarkable.' 
'In this description of Lakshmi one thing only offends 
me, that she is said to have four arms. Each of Vishnu's arms, single, as far as the elbow, there branches into two; but Lakshmi in all the brass seals that I possess or remember to have seen has two arms only. Nor does this deformity of redundant limbs suit the pattern of perfect beauty.' SCHLEGEL. I have omitted the offensive epithet.
58:2b Purandhar, a common title of Indra.

Next: Canto XLVII.: Sumatí.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVII.: SUMATÍ.
Thus to Lord Indra, Thousand-eyed,
Softly beseeching Diti sighed.
When but a blighted bud was left,
Which Indra's hand in seven had cleft: 1b
'No fault, O Lord of Gods, is thine;The blame herein is only mine.But for one grace I fain would pray,As thou hast reft this hope away.This bud, O Indra, which a blightHas withered ere it saw the light--From this may seven fair spirits riseTo rule the regions of the skies.Be theirs through heaven's unbounded spaceOn shoulders of the winds to race,My children, drest in heavenly forms,Far-famed as Maruts, Gods of storms.One God to Brahmá's sphere assign,Let one, O Indra, watch o'er thine;And ranging through the lower air,The third the name of Vayu 
2b bear.
Gods let the four remaining be,And roam through space, obeying thee.'

The Town-destroyer, Thousand-eyed,
Who smote fierce Bali till he died,Joined suppliant hands, and thus replied:'Thy children heavenly forms shall wear;The names devised by thee shall bear,And, Maruts called by my decree,Shall Amrit drink and wait on me.From fear and age and sickness freed.Through the three worlds their wings shall speed.'Thus in the hermits' holy shadeMother and son their compact made,And then, as fame relates, content,Home to the happy skies they went.This is the spot--so men have told--Where Lord Mahendra 
3b dwelt of old,
This is the blessed region whereHis votaress mother claimed his care.Here gentle Alambúshá bareTo old Ikshváku, king and sage,Vis'álá, glory of his age,By whom, a monarch void of guilt,Was this fair town Vis'álá built.
p. 60
His son was Hemachandra, stillRenowned for might and warlike skill.From him the great Suchandra came;His son, Dhúmrás'va, dear to fame.

Next followed royal Srinjay; then
Famed Sahadeva, lord of men.Next came Kus'ás'va, good and mild,Whose son was Somadatta styled,And Sumati, his heir, the peerOf Gods above, now governs here.And ever through Ikshváku's grace,Vis'álá's kings, his noble race,Are lofty-souled, and blest with lengthOf days, with virtue, and with strength.This night, O prince, we here will sleep;And when the day begins to peep,Our onward way will take with thee,The king of Mithilá to see.'
Then Sumati, the king, aware
Of Vis'vámitra's advent thereCame quickly forth with (illegible) meetThe lofty-minded sage to greet.Girt with his priest and lords the kingDid low obeisance, worshipping.With suppliant hands, with head inclined,Thus spoke he after question kind;'Since thou hast deigned to bless my sight,   And grace awhile thy servant's seat,High fate is mine, great Anchorite,   And none may with my bliss compete.'

Footnotes
59:1 A few verses are here left untranslated on account 
of the subject and language being offensive to modern 
taste.
59:1b 'In this myth of Indra destroying the unborn fruit 
of Diti with his thunderbolt, from which afterwards 
came the Maruts or Gods of Wind and Storm, geological phenomena are, it seems, represented under mythical images. In the great Mother of the Gods is, perhaps, figured the dry earth: Indra the God of thunder rends it open, and there issue from its rent bosom the Maruts or exhalations of the earth. But such ancient myths are difficult to interpret with absolute certainty.' GORRESIO.
59:2b Wind.
59:3b Indra, with mahá, great, prefixed.
Next: Canto XLVIII.: Indra And Ahalyá

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVIII.: INDRA AND AHALYÁ
When mutual courtesies had past,
Vis'álá's ruler spoke at last:'These princely youths, O Sage, who vieIn might with children of the sky,Heroic, born for happy fate,With elephants' or lions' gait,Bold as the tiger or the bull,With lotus eyes so large and full,Armed with the quiver, sword, and bow,Whose figures like the As'vins 
1 show,
Like children of the deathless Powers,Come freely to these shades of ours, 
2--
How have they reached on foot this place?What do they seek, and what their race?As sun and moon adorn the sky,This spot the heroes glorify.Alike in stature, port, and mien,The same fair form in each is seen,'
He spoke; and at the monarch's call
The best of hermits told him all,
How in the grove with him they dwelt,

And slaughter to the demons dealt.
Then wonder filled the monarch's breast,Who tended well each royal guest.Thus entertained, the princely pairRemained that night and rested there,And with the morn's returning rayTo Mithilá pursued their way.
When Janak's lovely city first
Upon their sight, yet distant, burst,The hermits all with joyful criesHailed the fair town that met their eyes.Then Ráma saw a holy wood,Close, in the city's neighbourhood,O'ergrown, deserted, marked by age,And thus addressed the mighty sage:'O reverend lord. I long to knowWhat hermit dwelt here long ago.'Then to the prince his holy guide,Most eloquent of men, replied:'O Ráma, listen while I tellWhose was this grove, and what befellWhen in the fury of his rageThe high saint cursed the hermitage.This was the grove--most lovely then--Of Gautam, O thou best of men,Like heaven itself, most honoured byThe Gods who dwell above the sky.Here with Ahalyá at his side

His fervid task the ascetic plied.
Years fled in thousands. On a dayIt chanced the saint had gone away,When Town-destroying Indra came,And saw the beauty of the dame.The sage's form the God endued,And thus the fair Ahalyá wooed:'Love, sweet! should brook no dull delayBut snatch the moments when he may.'She knew him in the saint's disguise,Lord Indra of the Thousand Eyes,But touched by love's unholy fire,She yielded to the God's desire.
'Now, Lord of Gods!' she whispered, 'flee,
From Gautam save thyself and me.'Trembling with doubt and wild with dreadLord Indra from the cottage fled;But fleeing in the grove he metThe home-returning anchoret,Whose wrath the Gods and fiends would shun,Such power his fervent rites had won.Fresh from the lustral flood he came,In splendour like the burning flame,With fuel for his sacred rites,And grass, the best of eremites.The Lord of Gods was sad of cheerTo see the mighty saint so near,And when the holy hermit spied

In hermit's garb the Thousand-eyed,
p. 61
He knew the whole, his fury broke
Forth on the sinner as he spoke:
Because my form thou hast assumed,
And wrought this folly, thou art doomed,For this my curse to thee shall cling,Henceforth a sad and sexless thing'
No empty threat that sentence came,
It chilled his soul and marred his frame,
His might and godlike vigour fled,And every nerve was cold and dead.
Then on his wife his fury burst.
And thus the guilty dame he cursed:'For countless years, disloyal spouse,Devoted to severest vows,Thy bed the ashes, air thy food,Here shalt thou live in solitude.This lonely grove thy home shall be,And not an eye thy form shall see.When Ráma, Das'aratha's child,Shall seek these shades then drear and wild,His coming shall remove thy stain,And make the sinner pure again.

Due honour paid to him, thy guest,
Shall cleanse thy fond and erring breast,Thee to my side in bliss restore,And give thy proper shape once more.' 
1
Thus to his guiltv wife he said,Then far the holy Gautam fled.And on Himálaya's lovely heightsSpent the long years in sternest rites.'
        * * * * *
Footnotes
60:1 The Heavenly Twins.
60:2 Not banished from heaven as the inferior Gods and 
demigods sometimes were.
Next: Canto XLIX.: Ahalyá Freed.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIX.: AHALYÁ FREED.
Then Ráma, following still his guide,
Within the grove, with Lakshman, hied.Her vows a wondrous light had lentTo that illustrious penitent.He saw the glorious lady, screenedFrom eye of man, and God, and fiend,Like some bright portent which the careOf Brahmá launches through the air,Designed by his illusive artTo flash a moment and depart:Or like the flame that leaps on highTo sink involved in smoke and die:
Or like the full moon shining through
The wintry mist, then lost to view:Or like the sun's reflection, castUpon the flood, too bright to last:So was the glorious dame till thenRemoved from Gods' and mortals' ken,Till--such was Gautam's high decree--Prince Ráma came to set her free.
Then, with great joy that dame to meet,

The sons of Raghu clapped her feet;
And she, remembering Gautam's oath,With gentle grace received them both;Then water for their feet she gave,Guest-gift, and all that strangers crave.
The prince, of courteous rule aware,
Received, as meet, the lady's care.Then flowers came down in copious rain,And moving to the heavenly strainOf music in the skies that rang.The nymphs and minstrels danced and sang:And all the Gods with one glad voicePraised the great dame, and cried, 'Rejoice!Through fervid rites no more defiled,But with thy husband reconciled.'Gautam, the holy hermit knew--For naught escaped his godlike view--That Ráma lodged beneath that shade,And hasting there his homage paid.He took Ahalyá to his side.From sin and folly purified,And let his new-found consort bearIn his austerities a share.
Then Ráma, pride of Raghu's race,
Welcomed by Gautam, face to face,Who every highest honour showed,To Mithilá pursued his road.

Footnotes
61:1 Kumarila says:' In the same manner, if it is said 
that Indra was the seducer of Ahalyá this does not imply 
that the God Indra committed such a crime, but Indra means the sun, and Ahalyá (from ahan and lí) the night; and as the night is seduced and ruined by the sun of the morning, therefore is Indra called the paramour of Ahalyá.' MAX MULLER, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p.530
Next: Canto L.: Janak.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO L.: JANAK.
The sons of Raghu journeyed forth,
Bending their steps 'twixt east and north.Soon, guided by the sage, they found,Enclosed, a sacrificial ground.Then to the best of saints, his guide,In admiration Ráma cried:
The high-souled king no toil has spared,
But nobly for his rite prepared.How many thousand Bráhmans here,From every region, far and near,Well read in holy lore, appear!How many tents, that sages screen,With wains in hundreds, here are seen!Great Bráhman, let us find a placeWhere we may stay and rest a space.'The hermit did as Ráma prayed,And in a spot his lodging made,
p. 62
Far from the crowd, sequestered, clear,With copious water flowing near.

Then Janak, best of kings, aware
Of Vis'vámitra lodging there,With S'atánanda for his guide--The priest on whom he most relied.His chaplain void of guile and stain--And others of his priestly train,Bearing the gift that greets the guest,To meet him with all honour pressed.The saint received with gladsome mindEach honour and observance kind:Then of his health he asked the king,And how his rites were prospering,Janak, with chaplain and with priest,Addressed the hermits, chief and least,Accosting all, in due degree,With proper words of courtesy.Then, with his palms together laid,The king his supplication made:'Deign, reverend lord, to sit thee downWith these good saints of high renown.'Then sate the chief of hermits there,Obedient to the monarch's prayer.Chaplain and priest, and king and peer,Sate in their order, far or near.Then thus the king began to say:'The Gods have blest my rite to-day,And with the sight of thee repaidThe preparations I have made.Grateful am I, so highly blest,

That thou, of saints the holiest,
Hast come, O Bráhman, here with allThese hermits to the festival.Twelve days, O Bráhman Sage, remain--For so the learned priests ordain--And then, O heir of Kus'ik's name,The Gods will come their dues to claim.'
With looks that testified delight
Thus spake he to the anchorite,Then with his suppliant hands upraised,He asked, as earnestly he gazed:'These princely youths, O Sage, who vieIn might with children of the sky,Heroic, born for happy fate,With elephants' or lions' gait,Bold as the tiger and the bull,With lotus eyes so large and full,Armed with the quiver, sword and bow,Whose figures like the As'vins show,Like children of the heavenly Powers,Come freely to these shades of ours,--How have they reached on foot this place?What do they seek, and what their race?As sun and moon adorn the sky,This spot the heroes glorify:Alike in stature, port, and mien,The same fair form in each is seen.' 
1

Thus spoke the monarch, lofty-souled.
The saint, of heart unfathomed, toldHow, sons of Das'aratha, theyAccompanied his homeward way,How in the hermitage they dwelt,And slaughter to the demons dealt:Their journey till the spot they nearedWhence fair Vis'álá's towers appeared:Ahalyá seen and freed from taint;Their meeting with her lord the saint;And how they thither came, to knowThe virtue of the famous bow.
Thus Vis'vámitra spoke the whole
To royal Janak, great of soul.And when this wondrous tale was o'er,The glorious hermit said no more.
Footnotes
62:1 The preceding sixteen lines have occured before in 
Canto XLVIII. This Homeric custom of repeating a 
passage of several lines is strange to our poet. This is the only instance I remember. The repetition of single lines is common enough.' SCHLEGEL.

Next: Canto LI.: Vis'vámitra.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LI.: VIS'VÁMITRA.
Wise Vis'vámitra's tale was done:
Then sainted Gautam's eldest son,Great S'atánanda, far-renowned,Whom long austerities had crownedWith glory--as the news he heardThe down upon his bodv stirred,--Filled full of wonder at the sightOf Ráma, felt supreme delight.When S'atánanda saw the pairOf youthful princes seated there,He turned him to the holy manWho sate at ease, and thus began:'And didst thou, mighty Sage, in truthShow clearly to this royal youthMy mother, glorious far and wide,Whom penance-rites have sanctified?And did my glorious mother--she,Heiress of noble destiny--Serve her great guest with woodland store,Whom all should honour evermore?Didst thou the tale to Ráma tellOf what in ancient days befell,The sin, the misery, and the shameOf guilty God and faithless dame?

And, O thou best of hermits, say,
Did Ráma's healing presence stayHer trial? was the wife restoredAgain to him, my sire and lord?Say, Hermit, did that sire of mineReceive her with a soul benign,When long austerities in timeHad cleansed her from the taint of crime?
p. 63
And, son of Kus'ik, let me know,Did my great-minded father showHonour to Ráma, and regard,Before he journeyed hitherward?'The hermit with attentive earMarked all the questions ot the seer:To him for eloquence far-famed,His eloquent reply he framed:'Yea, 'twas my care no task to shun,And all I had to do was done;As Renuká and Bhrigu's child,The saint and dame were reconciled.'   When the great sage had thus replied,To Ráma S'atánanda cried:'A welcome visit, Prince, is thine,Thou scion of King Raghu's line.With him to guide thy way aright,This sage invincible in might,

This Bráhman sage, most glorious-bright,
By long austerities has wroughtA wondrous deed, exceeding thought:Thou knowest well, O strong of arm,This sure defence from scathe and harm.None, Ráma, none is living nowIn all the earth more blest than thou,That thou hast won a saint so triedIn fervid rites thy life to guide.Now listen, Prince, while I relateHis lofty deeds and wondrous fate.He was a monarch pious-souled.His foemen in the dust he rolled;Most learned, prompt at duty's claim,His people's good his joy and aim.   Of old the Lord of Life gave birthTo mighty Kus'a, king of earth.His son was Kus'anábha, strong,Friend of the right, the foe of wrong.Gádhi, whose fame no time shall dim,Heir of his throne was born to him,And Vis'vámitra, Gádhi's heir,Governed the land with kingly care.While years unnumbered rolled awayThe monarch reigned with equal sway.At length, assembling many a band,He led his warriors round the land--Complete in tale, a mighty force,Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse.

Through cities, groves, and floods he passed,
O'er lofty hills, through regions vast.He reached Vas'ishtha's pure abode,Where trees, and flowers, and creepers glowed,Where troops of sylvan creatures fed;Which saints and angels visited.Gods, fauns, and bards of heavenly race,And spirits, glorified the place;The deer their timid ways forgot,And holy Bráhmans thronged the spot.Bright in their souls, like fire, were these,Made pure by long austerities,Bound by the rule of vows severe,And each in glory Brahmá's peer.Some fed on water, some on air,Some on the leaves that withered there.Roots and wild fruit were others' food;All rage was checked, each sense subdued,There Bálakhilyas  
1 went and came,
Now breathed the prayer, now fed the flame:These, and ascetic bands beside,The sweet retirement beautified.Such was Vas'ishtha's blest retreat,Like Brahmá's own celestial seat,Which gladdened Vis'vamitra's eyes,Peerless for warlike enterprise.
Next: Canto LII.: Vas'ishtha's Feast.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LII.: VAS'ISHTHA'S FEAST.
Right glad was Vis'vámitra when
He saw the prince of saintly men.Low at his feet the hero bent,And did obeisance, reverent.   The king was welcomed in, and shownA seat beside the hermit's own,Who offered him, when resting there,Fruit in due course, and woodland fare.And Vis'vámitra, noblest king,Received Vas'ishtha's welcoming,Turned to his host, and prayed him tellThat he and all with him were well.Vas'ishtha to the king repliedThat all was well on every side,That fire, and vows, and pupils throve,And all the trees within the grove.And then the son of Brahmá, bestOf all who pray with voice suppressed,Questioned with pleasant words like theseThe mighty king who sate at ease:'And is it well with thee? I pray;And dost thou win by virtuous swayThy people's love, discharging allThe duties on a king that fall?

Are all thy servants fostered well?
Do all obey, and none rebel?Hast thou, destroyer of the foe,No enemies to overthrow?Does fortune, conqueror! still attendThy treasure, host, and every friend!Is it all well? Does happy fateOn sons and children's children wait!'
   He spoke. The modest king replied
That all was prosperous far and wide.
p. 64
Thus for awhile the two conversed,As each to each his tale rehearsed,And as the happy moments flew,Their joy and friendship stronger grew.When such discourse had reached an end,Thus spoke the saint most reverendTo royal Vis'vamitra, whileHis features brightened with a smile:'O mighty lord of men. I fainWould banquet thee and all thy trainIn mode that suits thy station high:And do not thou my prayer deny.Let my good lord with favour takeThe offering that I fain would make,And let me honour, ere we part.

My royal guest with loving heart.'
Him Vis'vámitra thus addressed:
'Why make, O Saint, this new request?Thy welcome and each gracious wordSufficient honour have conferred.Thou gavest roots and fruit to eat,The treasures of this pure retreat,And water for my mouth and feet;And--boon I prize above the rest--Thy presence has mine eyesight blest.Honoured by thee in every way,To whom all honour all should pay,I now will go. My lord, Good-bye!Regard me with a friendly eye.'
Him speaking thus Vas'ishtha stayed,
And still to share his banquet prayed.The will of Gádhi's son he bent,And won the monarch to consent,Who spoke in answer. 'Let it be,Great Hermit, as it pleases thee.'When, best of those who breathe the prayer,He heard the king his will declare,He called the cow of spotted skin,All spot without, all pure within.'Come, Dapple-skin,' he cried, 'with speed;Hear thou my words and help at need.My heart is set to entertain

This monarch and his mighty train
With sumptuous meal and worthy fare;Be thine the banquet to prepare.Each dainty cute, each goodly dish,Of six-fold taste 
1 as each may wish--
All these, O cow of heavenly power,Rain down for me in copious shower:Viands and drink for tooth and lip,To eat, to suck, to quaff, to sip--Of these sufficient, and to spare,O plenty-giving cow, prepare.'
Footnotes
63:1 Divine personages of minute size produced from 
the hair of Brahmá, and probably the origin of 
            'That small infantry
   Warred on by cranes.'
64:1 Sweet, salt, pungent, bitter, acid, and astringent.
Next: Canto LIII.: Vis'vàmitra's Request.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIII.: VIS'VÀMITRA'S REQUEST.
Thus charged, O slayer of thy foes,
The cow from whom all plenty flows,Obedient to her saintly lord,Viands to suit each taste, outpoured.Honey she gave, and roasted grain,Mead sweet with flowers, and sugar-cane.Each beverage of flavour rare,And food of every sort, were there:Hills of hot rice, and sweetened cakes,And curdled milk and soup in lakes.Vast beakers foaming to the brimWith sugared drink prepared for him,And dainty sweetmeats, deftly made,Before the hermit's guests were laid.So well regaled, so nobly fed,The mighty army banqueted,And all the train, from chief to least,Delighted in Vas'ishtha's feast.Then Vis'vámitra, royal sage,Surrounded by his vassalage,Prince, peer, and counsellor, and allFrom highest lord to lowest thrall,Thus feasted, to Vas'ishtha criedWith joy, supremely gratified:

'Richh honour I, thus entertained,
Most honourable lord, have gained:Now hear, before I journey hence,My words, O skilled in eloquence.Bought for a hundred thousand kine,Let Dapple-skin. O Saint, be mine.A wondrous jewel is thy cow,And gems are for the monarch's brow. 
1b
To me her rightful lord resignThis Dapple-skin thou callest thine.'
The great Vas'ishtha, thus addressed,
Arch-hermit of the holy breast,To Vis'vamitra answer made,The king whom all the land obeyed:Not for a hundred thousand,--nay,Not if ten million thou wouldst pay,With silver heaps the price to swell,--Will I my cow, O Monarch, sell.Unmeet for her is such a fate.That I my friend should alienate.As glory with the virtuous, sheFor ever makes her home with me.On her mine offerings which ascendTo Gods and spirits all depend:My very life is due to her,My guardian, friend, and minister.
p. 65

The feeding of the sacred flame, 1
The dole which living creatures claim. 2
The mighty sacrifice by fire,
Each formula the rites require, 3
And various saving lore beside,Are by her aid, in sooth, supplied.The banquet which thy host has shared,Believe it, was by her prepared.In her mine only treasures lie,She cheers mine heart and charms mine eye.And reasons more could I assignWhy Dapple-skin can ne'er be thine.'
The royal sage, his suit denied,
With eloquence more earnest cried:'Tusked elephants, a goodly train,Each with a golden girth and chain.Whose goads with gold well fashioned shine--Of these be twice seven thousand thine.And four-horse cars with gold made bright,With steeds most beautifully white,Whose bells make music as they go,Eight hundred, Saint, will I bestow.Eleven thousand mettled steedsFrom famous lands, of noble breeds--These will I gladly give, O thouDevoted to each holy vow.Ten million heifers, fair to view,

Whose sides are marked with every hue--
These in exchange will I assign;But let thy Dapple-skin be mine.Ask what thou wilt, and piles untoldOf priceless gems and gleaming gold,O best of Bráhmans, shall be thine;But let thy Dapple-skin be mine.'
The great Vas'ishtha, thus addressed.
Made answer to the king's request:'Ne'er will I give my cow away,My gem, my wealth, my life and stay.My worship at the moon's first show,And at the full, to her I owe;And sacrifices small and great,Which largess due and gifts await.From her alone, their root, O King,
My rites and holy service spring.
What boots it further words to say?I will not give my cow awayWho yields me what I ask each day.'
Footnotes
64:1b 'Of old hoards and minerals in the earth, the king 

is entitled to half by reason of his general protection, 
and because he is the lord paramount of the soil.' 
                              MANU, Book VIII. 39.
65:1 Ghí or clarified butter, 'holy oil,' being one of the 
essentials of sacrifice.
65:2 A Brahman had five principal duties to discharge every day: study and teaching the Veda, oblations to the 
manes or spirits of the departed, sacrifice to the Gods, hospitable offerings to men, and a gift of food to all creatures. The last consisted of rice or other grain which the Bráhman was to offer every day outside his house in the open air. MANU, Book III. 70.' GORRESIO.
65:3 These were certain sacred words of invocation 
such a sváhá, vashat, etc., pronounced at the time of 
sacrifice.
Next: Canto LIV.: The Battle.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIV.: THE BATTLE.
As Saint Vas'ishtha answered so,
Nor let the cow of plenty go,The monarch, as a last resource,Began to drag her off by force.While the king's servants tore awayTheir moaning, miserable prey,Sad, sick at heart, and sore distressed,She pondered thus within her breast:'Why am I thus forsaken? whyBetrayed by him of soul most high.Vas'ishtha, ravished by the handsOf soldiers of the monarch's bands?Ah me! what evil have I doneAgainst the lofty-minded one,That he, so pious, can exposeThe innocent whose love he knows?'In her sad breast as thus she thought,And heaved deep sighs with anguish fraught,With wondrous speed away she fled,And back to Saint Vas'ishtha sped.She hurled by hundreds to the groundThe menial crew that hemmed her round,And flying swifter than the blastBefore the saint herself she cast.

There Dapple-skin before the saint
Stood moaning forth her sad complaint,And wept and lowed: such tones as comeFrom wandering cloud or distant drum.'O son of Brahmá,' thus cried she,'Why hast thou thus forsaken me,That the king's men, before thy face,Bear off thy servant from her place?'
Then thus the Bráhman saint replied
To her whose heart with woe was tried,And grieving for his favourite's sake.As to a suffering sister spake:'I leave thee not: dismiss the thought;Nor, duteous, hast thou failed in aught.This king, o'erweening in the prideOf power, has reft thee from my side.Little, I ween, my strength could do'Gainst him, a mighty warrior too,Strong, as a soldier born and bred,--Great, as a king whom regions dread.See! what a host the conqueror leads,With elephants, and cars, and steeds.O'er countless bands his pennons fly;So is he mightier far than I,'
p. 66
He spoke. Then she, in lowly mood,

To that high saint her speech renewed:
'So judge not they who wisest are:The Brahman's might is mightier far.For Brahmans strength from Heaven derive,And warriors bow when Bráhmans strive.A boundless power 'tis thine to wield:To such a king thou shouldst not yield,Who, very mighty though he be,--So fierce thy strength,--must bow to thee.Command me, Saint. Thy power divineHas brought me here and made me thine;And I, howe'er the tyrant boast,Will tame his pride and slay his host.'Then cried the glorious sage: 'CreateA mighty force the foe to mate,'
She lowed, and quickened into life,
Pahlavas, 
1 burning for the strife,
King Vis'vámitra's army slewBefore the very leader's view.The monarch in excessive ire,His eyes with fury darting fire,Rained every missile on the foeTill all the Pahlavas were low.She, seeing all her champions slain,Lying by thousands on the plain.Created, by her mere desire,Yavans and S'akas, fierce and dire.And all the ground was overspread

With Yavans and with S'akas dread:
A host of warriors bright and strong,And numberless in closest throng:The threads within the lotus stem,So densely packed, might equal them.In gold-hued mail 'gainst war's attacks,Each bore a sword and battle-axe.The royal host, where'er these came,Fell as if burnt with ravening flame.
The monarch, famous through the world
Again his fearful weapons hurled,
That made Kámbojas, 
1b Barbars, 2b all,
With Yavans, troubled, flee and fall.
Footnotes
66:1 It is well known that the Persians were called 
Pahlavas by the Indians. The S'akas are nomad tribes 
inhabiting Central Asia, the Scythes of the Greeks, whom the Persians also, as Herodotus tells us, called 
S'akas just as the Indians did. Lib. VII 64 ο• γ•ρ Π•ρσαι π•ντας το•ς Σκ•θας, καλ•ουσι Σ•κας. The 
name Yavana seems to be used rather indefinitely for nations situated beyond Persia to the west.... After the 

time of Alexander the Great the Indians as well as the 
Persians called the Greeks also Yavans.' SCHLEGEL. 
Lassen thinks that the Pahlavas were the same people as 
the Π•κτυες of Herodotus, and that this non-Indian 
people, dwelt on the north-west confines of India.
Next: Canto LV.: The Hermitage Burnt.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LV.: THE HERMITAGE BURNT.
So o'er the field that host lay strewn,
By Vis'vámitra's darts o'erthrown.Then thus Vas'ishtha charged the cow:'Create with all thy vigour now.'
Forth sprang Kámbojas, as she lowed;
Bright as the sun their faces glowed,Forth from her udder Barbars poured,--Soldiers who brandished spear and sword,--And Yavans with their shafts and darts,And S'akas from her hinder parts.And every pore upon her fell,And every hair-producing cell,With Mlechchhas 
3b and Kirátas 4b teemed,
And forth with them Hárítas streamed.And Vis'vámitra's mighty force,Car, elephant, and foot, and horse,Fell in a moment's time, subduedBy that tremendous multitude.The monarch's hundred sons, whose eyesBeheld the rout in wild surprise,Armed with all weapons, mad with rage,Rushed fiercely on the holy sage.

One cry he raised, one glance he shot,
And all fell scorched upon the spot:Burnt by the sage to ashes, theyWith horse, and foot, and chariot, lay.The monarch mourned, with shame and pain,His army lost, his children slain,Like Ocean when his roar is hushed,Or some great snake whose fangs are crushed:
appear that it is the object of this legend to represent 
this miraculous creation as the origin of these tribes, and that nothing more may have been intended than that the cow called into existence large armies, of the same stock with particular tribes previously existing.}
p. 67
Or as in swift eclipse the SunDark with the doom he cannot shun:Or a poor bird with mangled wing--So, reft of sons and host, the king.No longer, by ambition fired,The pride of war his breast inspired.He gave his empire to his son--Of all he had, the only one:And bade him rule as kings are taughtThen straight a hermit-grove he sought.Far to Himálaya's side he fled,Which bards and Nágas visited,

And, Mahádeva's 1 grace to earn,
He gave his life to penance stern.
A lengthened season thus passed by,When S'iva's self, the Lord most High,Whose banner shows the pictured bull, 
2
Appeared, the God most bountiful:
'Why fervent thus in toil and pain?
Wliat brings thee here? what boon to gain?Thy heart's desire, O Monarch, speak:I grant the boons which mortals seek.'The king, his adoration paid,To Mahádeva answer made:'If thou hast deemed me fit to winThy favour, O thou void of sin,On me, O mighty God, bestowThe wondrous science of the bow,All mine, complete in every part,With secret spell and mystic art.To me be all the arms revealedThat Gods, and saints, and Titans wield,And every dart that arms the handsOf spirits, fiends and minstrel bands.Be mine, O Lord supreme in place,This token of thy boundless grace.'
The Lord of Gods then gave consent,
And to his heavenly mansion went.Triumphant in the arms he held,

The monarch's breast with glory swelled.
So swells the ocean, when uponHis breast the full moon's beams have shone.Already in his mind he viewedVas'ishtha at his feet subdued.He sought that hermit's grove, and thereLaunched his dire weapons through the air,Till scorched by might that none could stayThe hermitage in ashes lay.Where'er the inmates saw, aghast,The dart that Vis'vámitra cast,To every side they turned and fledIn hundreds forth disquieted.Vas'ishtha's pupils caught the fear,And every bird and every deer,And fled in wild confusion forth
Eastward and westward, south and north,
And so Vas'ishtha's holy shadeA solitary wild was made,Silent awhile, for not a soundDisturbed the hush that was around.
Vas'ishtha then, with eager cry,
Called, 'Fear not, friends, nor seek to fly.This son of Gádhi dies to-day,Like hoar-frost in the morning's ray.'Thus having said, the glorious sageSpoke to the king in words of rage:

'Because thou hast destroyed this grove
Which long in holy quiet throve,By folly urged to senseless crime,Now shalt thou die before thy time.'
Footnotes
66:1b See page 13, note 6.
66:2b Barbarians, non-Sanskrit-speaking tribes.
66:3b A comprehensive term for foreign or outcast 
races of different faith and language from the Hindus.
66:4b The Kirátas and Hárítas are savage aborigines of India who occupy hills and jungles and are altogether 
different in race and character from the Hindus. Dr. Muir remarks in his Sanskrit Texts, Vol. I. p. 488 (second edition
67:1 The Great God, S'iva.
67:2 Nandi, the snow-white bull, the attendant and 
favourite vehicle of Siva.

Next: Canto LVI.: Vis'vámitra's Vow.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVI.: VIS'VÁMITRA'S VOW.
But Vis'vámitra, at the threat
Of that illustrious anchoret,Cried, as he launched with ready handA fiery weapon, 'Stand, O Stand!'Vas'ishtha, wild with rage and hate,Raising, as 'twere the Rod of Fate,His mighty Bráhman wand on high,To Vis'vámitra made reply:'Nay, stand. O Warrior thou, and showWhat soldier can, 'gainst Bráhman foe.O Gádhi's son, thy days are told;Thy pride is tamed, thy dart is cold.How shall a warrior's puissance dareWith Bráhman's awful strength compare?To-day, base Warrior, shall thou feelThat God-sent might is more than steel.'He raised his Bráhman staff, nor missedThe fiery dart that near him hissed:And quenched the fearful weapon fell,As flame beneath the billow's swell.
Then Gádhi's son in fury threw
Lord Varun's arm and Rudra's too:Indra's fierce bolt that all destroys;

That which the Lord of Herds employs:
The Human, that which minstrels Keep,The deadly Lure, the endless Sleep:The Yawner, and the dart which charms;Lament and Torture, fearful arms:The Terrible, the dart which dries,The Thunderbolt which quenchless flies,And Fate's dread net, and Brahmá's noose,And that which waits for Varun's use:The dart he loves who wields the bowPináka, and twin bolts that glowWith fury as they flash and fly,The quenchless Liquid and the Dry:The dart of Vengeance, swift to kill:The Goblins' dart, the Curlew's Bill:
p. 68
The discus both of Fate and Right,And Vishnu's, of unerring flight:The Wind-God's dart, the Troubler dread,The weapon named the Horse's Head.From his fierce hand two spears were thrown,And the great mace that smashes bone;The dart of spirits of the air,And that which Fate exults to bear;The Trident dart which slaughters foes,And that which hanging skulls compose: 
1
These fearful darts in fiery rain

He hurled upon the saint amain,
An awful miracle to view.But as the ceaseless tempest flew,The sage with wand of God-sent powerStill swallowed up that fiery shower.
Then Gádhi's son, when these had failed,
With Brahmá's dart his foe assailed.The Gods, with Indra at their head,And Nágas, quailed disquieted,And saints and minstrels, when they sawThe king that awful weapon draw;And the three worlds were filled with dread,And trembled as the missile sped.
The saint, with Bráhman wand, empowered
By lore divine that dart devoured.Nor could the triple world withdrawRapt gazes from that sight of awe;For as be swallowed down the dartOf Brahmá, sparks from every part,From finest pore and hair-cell, brokeEnveloped in a veil of smoke.The staff he waved was all aglowLike Yáma's sceptre, King below,Or like the lurid fire of FateWhose rage the worlds will desolate.
The hermits, whom that sight had awed,

Extolled the saint, with hymn and laud:
'Thy power, O Sage, is ne'er in vain:Now with thy might thy might restrain.Be gracious, Master, and allow
The worlds to rest from trouble now;
For Vis'vámitra, strong and dread,By thee has been discomfited.'
Then, thus addressed, the saint, well pleased.
The fury of his wrath appeased.The king, o'erpowered and ashamed,With many a deep-drawn sigh exclaimed:'Ah! Warriors' strength is poor and slight;A Bráhman's power is truly might.This Bráhman staff the hermit heldThe fury of my darts has quelled.This truth within my heart impressed,With senses ruled and tranquil breastMy task austere will I begin,And Bráhmanhood will strive to win.'
Footnotes
68:1 'The names of many of these weapons which are 
mythical and partly allegorical have occurred in Canto 

XXIX. The general signification of the story is clear 
enough. It is a contest for supremacy between the regal or military order and Bráhmanical or priestly authority, like one of those struggles which our own Europe saw in the middle ages when without employing warlike weapons the priesthood frequently gained the victory.' SCHLEGEL. 
For a full account of the early contests between the 
Bráhmans and the Kshattriyas, see Muir's Original Sanskrit Texts (Second edition) Vol. I. Ch. IV. 
Next: Canto LVII.: Tris'anku.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVII.: TRIS'ANKU.
Then with his heart consumed with woe,
Still brooding on his overthrowBy the great saint he had defied,At every breath the monarch sighed.Forth from his home his queen he led,And to a land far southward fled.There, fruit and roots his only food,He practised penance, sense-subdued,And in that solitary spotFour virtuous sons the king begot:Havishyand, from the offering named,And Madhushyand, for sweetness famed,Mahárath, chariot-borne in fight,And Dridhanetra strong of sight.
A thousand years had passed away,
When Brahmá, Sire whom all obey,Addressed in pleasant words like theseHim rich in long austerities:'Thou by the penance, Kus'ik's son,A place 'mid royal saints hast won.Pleased with thy constant penance, weThis lofty rank assign to thee.'

Thus spoke the glorious Lord most High
Father of earth and air and sky,And with the Gods around him spreadHome to his changeless sphere he sped.But Vis'vámitra scorned the grace,And bent in shame his angry face.Burning with rage, o'erwhelmed with grief,Thus in his heart exclaimed the chief:'No fruit, I ween, have I securedBy strictest penance long endured,If Gods and all the saints decreeTo make but royal saint of me.'Thus pondering, he with sense subdued,With sternest zeal his vows renewed.
p. 69
Then reigned a monarch, true of soul,Who kept each sense in firm control;Of old Ikshváku's line he came,That glories in Tris'anku's 
1 name.
Within his breast, O Raghu's child,Arose a longing, strong and wild,Great offerings to the Gods to pay,And win, alive, to heaven his way.His priest Vas'ishtha's aid he sought,And told him of his secret thought.But wise Vas'ishtha showed the hopeWas far beyond the monarch's scope.

Tris'anku then, his suit denied,
Far to the southern region hied,To beg Vas'ishtha's sons to aidThe mighty plan his soul had made.There King Tris'anku, far renowned,Vas'ishtha's hundred children found,Each on his fervent vows intent,For mind and fame preëminent.To these the famous king applied,Wise children of his holy guide.Saluting each in order due.His eyes, for shame, he downward threw,And reverent hands together pressed,The glorious company addressed:'I as a humble suppliant seekSuccour of you who aid the weak.A mighty offering I would pay,But sage Vas'ishtna answered, Nay.Be yours permission to accord,And to my rites your help afford.Sons of my guide, to each of youWith lowly reverence here I sue;To each, intent on penance-vow,O Bráhmans, low my head I bow,And pray you each with ready heartIn my great rite to bear a part,That in the body I may riseAnd dwell with Gods within the skies.Sons of rny guide, none else I see

Can give what he refuses me.
Ikshváku's children still dependUpon their guide most reverend;And you, as nearest in degreeTo him, my deities shall be!'
Footnotes
69:1 'Tris'anku, king of Ayodhyá, was seventh in 
descent from Ikshváku. and Das'aratha holds the thirty-
fourth place in the same genealogv. See Canto LXX. We are thrown back, therefore, to very ancient times, and it occasions some surprise to find Vas'ishtha and Vis'vámitra, actors in these occurences, still alive in Ráma's time.'
Next: Canto LVIII.: Tris'anku Cursed.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVIII.: TRIS'ANKU CURSED.
Tris'anku's speech the hundred heard,
And thus replied, to anger stirred:'Why foolish King, by him denied,Whose truthful lips have never lied,Dost thou transgress his prudent rule,And seek, for aid, another school? 
1b
Ikshváku's sons have aye reliedMost surely on their holy guide:Then how dost thou, fond Monarch, dareTransgress the rule his lips declare?'Thy wish is vain,' the saint replied,And bade thee cast the plan aside.Then how can we, his sons, pretendIn such a rite our aid to lend?O Monarch, of the childish heart,Home to thy royal town depart.That mighty saint, thy priest and guide,At noblest rites may well preside:The worlds for sacrifice combinedA worthier priest could never find.'
Such speech of theirs the monarch heard,
Though rage distorted every word,

And to the hermits made reply:
'You, like your sire, my suit deny.For other aid I turn from you:So, rich in penance, Saints, adieu!'
Vas'ishtha's children heard, and guessed
His evil purpose scarce expressed,And cried, while rage their bosoms burned,'Be to a vile Chandála 
2b turned!'
p. 70
This said, with lofty thoughts inspired,Each to his own retreat retired.
That night Tris'anku underwent
Sad change in shape and lineament.Next morn, an outcast swart of hue,His dusky cloth he round him drew.His hair had fallen from his head,And roughness o'er his skin was spread.Such wreaths adorned him as are foundTo flourish on the funeral ground.Each armlet was an iron ring:Such was the figure of the king,That every counsellor and peer,And following townsman, fled in fear.
Alone, unyielding to dismay,

Though burnt by anguish night and day,
Great Vis'vámitra's side he sought,Whose treasures were by penance bought.
The hermit with his tender eyes
Looked on Tris'anku's altered guise,And grieving at his ruined stateAddressed him thus, compassionate:'Great King,' the pious hermit said,'What cause thy steps has hither led,Ayodhyá's mighty Sovereign, whomA curse has plagued with outcast's doom?'In vile Chandála's  
1 shape, the king
Heard Vis'vámitra's questioning,And, suppliant palm to palm applied,With answering eloquence he cried:'My priest and all his sons refusedTo aid the plan on which I mused.Failing to win the boon I sought,To this condition I was brought.I, in the body, Saint, would fainA mansion in the skies obtain.I planned a hundred rites for this,But still was doomed the fruit to miss.Pure are my lips from falsehood's stain,And pure they ever shall remain,--Yea, by a Warrior's faith I swear,--Though I be tried with grief and care.Unnumbered rites to Heaven I paid,

With righteous care the sceptre swayed;
And holy priest and high-souled guideMy modest conduct gratified.But, O thou best of hermits, theyOppose my wish these rites to pay;They one and all refuse consent,Nor aid me in my high intent.Fate is, I ween, the power supreme,Plan's effort but an idle dream,Fate whirls our plans, our all away;
Fate is our only hope and stay;
Now deign, O blessed Saint, to aidMe, even me by Fate betrayed,Who come, a suppliant, sore distressed,One grace, O Hermit, to request.No other hope or way I see:No other refuge waits for me.Oh, aid me in my fallen state,And human will shall conquer Fate.'
Footnotes
69:1b "It does not appear how Tris'anku, in asking the 
aid of Vas'ishtha's sons after applying in vain to their 
father, could be charged with resorting to another s'ákhá 

(School) in the ordinary sense of that word; as it is not 
conceivable that the sons should have been of another S'ákhá from the father, whose cause they espouse with so much warmth. The commentator in the Bombay edition explains the word S'ákhántaram as Yájanádiná rakshántaram, 'one who by sacrificing for thee, etc., will be another protector.' Gorresio's Gauda*? text, which may often be used as a commentary on the older one, has the following paraphrase of the words in question, ch. 60, 3. Múlam utsrijya*? kasmát tvam s'ákásv ichhasi lambitum*?. 'Why, forsaking the root, dost thou desire to hang upon the branches?'" MUIR, Sanskrit Texts, Vol. I., p. 401.
69:2b A Chandála was a man born of the illegal and 
impure union of a S'údra with a woman of one of the 
three higher castes.
70:1 The Chandála was regarded as the vilest and most 
abject of the men sprung from wedlock forbidden by the 
law (Mánavadharmas'ástra, Lib. X. 12.); a kind of social malediction weighed upon his head and rejected him from human society.' GORRESIO.
Next: Canto LIX.: The Sons of Vas'ishtha.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIX.: THE SONS OF VAS'ISHTHA.
Then Kus'ik's son, by pity warmed,
Spoke sweetly to the king transformed:'Hail! glory of Ikshváku's line:I know how bright thy virtues shine.Dismiss thy fear, O noblest Chief,For I myself will bring relief.The holiest saints will I inviteTo celebrate thy purposed rite:So shall thy vow, O King, succeed,And from thy cares shalt thou be freed.Thou in the form which now thou hast,Transfigured by the curse they cast,--Yea, in the body, King, shalt flee,Transported, where thou fain wouldst be.O Lord of men, I ween that thouHast heaven within thy hand e'en now,For very wisely hast thou done,And refuge sought with Kus'ik's son.'
Thus having said, the sage addressed
His sons, of men the holiest,And bade the prudent saints whate'erWas needed for the rite prepare.The pupils he was wont to teach

He summoned next, and spoke this speech:
'Go bid Vas'ishtha'a sons appear,And all the saints be gathered here.And what they one and all replyWhen summoned by this mandate high,To me with faithful care report,Omit no word and none distort.'
The pupils heard, and prompt obeyed,
To every side their way they made.Then swift from every quarter spedThe sages in the Vedas read.Back to that saint the envoys came,Whose glory shone like burning flame,And told him in their faithful speechThe answer that they bore from each:'Submissive to thy word, O Seer,The holy men are gathering here.By all was meet obedience shown:Mahodaya  
1b refused alone.
p. 71
And now, O Chief of hermits, hearWhat answer, chilling us with fear,Vas'ishtha's hundred sons returned,Thick-speaking as with rage they burned:'How will the Gods and saints partakeThe offerings that the prince would make,

And he a vile and outcast thing,
His ministrant one born a king?Can we, great Bráhmans, eat his food,And think to win beatitude,By Vis'vámitra purified?'Thus sire and sons in scorn replied,And as these bitter words they said,Wild fury made their eyeballs red.
Their answer when the arch-hermit heard,
His tranquil eyes with rage were blurred;Great fury in his bosom woke,And thus unto the youths he spoke:'Me, blameless me they dare to blame,And disallow the righteous claimMy fierce austerities have earned:To ashes be the sinners turned.Caught in the noose of Fate shall theyTo Yama's kingdom sink to-day.Seven hundred times shall they be bornTo wear the clothes the dead have worn.Dregs of the dregs, too vile to hate.The flesh of dogs their maws shall sate.In hideous form, in loathsome weed,A sad existence each shall lead.Mahodaya too, the fool who fainMy stainless life would try to stain,Stained in the world with long disgraceShall sink into a fowler's place.

Rejoicing guiltless blood to spill,
No pity through his breast shall thrill.Cursed by my wrath for many a day,His wretched life for sin shall pay.'
Thus, girt with hermit, saint, and priest,
Great Vis'vámitra spoke--and ceased.
Footnotes
70:1b This appellation, occuring nowhere else in the 
poem except as the name of a city, appears twice in this 
Canto as a name of Vas'ishtha.
Next: Canto LX.: Tris'anku's Ascension.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LX.: TRIS'ANKU'S ASCENSION.
So with ascetic might, in ire,
He smote the children and the sire.Then Vis'vámitra, far-renowned,Addressed the saints who gathered round:'See by my side Tris'anku stand,Ikshváku's son, of liberal hand.Most virtuous and gentle, heSeeks refuge in his woe with me.Now, holy men, with me unite,And order so his purposed riteThat in the body he may riseAnd win a mansion in the skies.'
They heard his speech with ready ear
And, every bosom filled with fearOf Vis'vámitra, wise and great.Spoke each to each in brief debate:'The breast of Kus'ik's son, we know,With furious wrath is quick to glow.Whate'er the words he wills to say,We must, be very sure, obey.Fierce is our lord as fire, and straightMay curse us all infuriate.So let us in these rites engage,

As ordered by the holy sage.
And with our best endeavour striveThat King Ikshváku's son, alive,In body to the skies may goBy his great might who wills it so.'
Then was the rite begun with care:
All requisites and means were there:And glorious Vis'vámitra lentHis willing aid as president.And all the sacred rites were doneBy rule and use, omitting none,By chaplain-priest, the hymns who knew,In decent form and order due.Some time in sacrifice had past,And Vis'vámitra made, at last,The solemn offering with the prayerThat all the Gods might come and share.But the Immortals, one and all,Refused to hear the hermit's call.
Then red with rage his eyeballs blazed:
The sacred ladle high he raised,And cried to King Ikshváku's son:'Behold my power, by penance won:Now by the might my merits lend,Ikshváku's child, to heaven ascend.In living frame the skies attain,Which mortals thus can scarcely gain.

My vows austere, so long endured,
Have, as I ween, some fruit assured.Upon its virtue, King, rely,And in thy body reach the sky.'
His speech had scarcely reached its close
When, as he stood, the sovereign rose,And mounted swiftly to the skiesBefore the wondering hermits' eyes'
But Indra, when he saw the king
His blissful regions entering,With all the army of the BlestThus cried unto the unbidden guest:'With thy best speed, Tris'anku, flee:Here is no home prepared for thee.By thy great master's curse brought low,Go, falling headlong, earthward go.'
Thus by the Lord of Gods addressed,
Tris'anku fell from fancied rest,And screaming in his swift descent,'O, save me, Hermit?' down he went.And Vis'vámitra heard his cry,And marked him falling from the sky,And giving all his passion sway,Cried out in fury, 'Stay, O stay!'
p. 72

By penance-power and holy lore,
Like Him who framed the worlds of yore,Seven other saints he fixed on highTo star with light the southern sky.Girt with his sages forth he went,And southward in the firmamentNew wreathed stars prepared to setIn many a sparkling coronet.He threatened, blind with rage and hate,Another Indra to create,Or, from his throne the ruler hurled,All Indraless to leave the world.Yea, borne away by passion's storm,The sage began new Gods to form.But then each Titan, God, and saint,Confused with terror, sick and faint,To high souled Vis'vámitra hied,And with soft words to soothe him tried:'Lord of high destiny, this king,To whom his master's curses cling,No heavenly home deserves to gain,Unpurified from curse and stain.'
The son of Kus'ik, undeterred,
The pleading of the Immortals heard,And thus in haughty words expressedThe changeless purpose of his breast:'Content ye, Gods: I soothly sware

Tris'anku to the skies to bear
Clothed in his body, nor can IMy promise cancel or deny.Embodied let the king ascendTo life in heaven that ne'er shall end.And let these new-made stars of mineFirm and secure for ever shine.Let these, my work, remain secureLong as the earth and heaven endure.This, all ye Gods, I crave: do youAllow the boon for which I sue.'Then all the Gods their answer made:'So be it, Saint, as thou hast prayed.Beyond the sun's diurnal wayThy countless stars in heaven shall stay:And 'mid them hung, as one divine,Head downward shall Tris'anku shine;And all thy stars shall ever flingTheir rays attendant on the king.' 
1
The mighty saint, with glory crowned,With all the sages compassed round,Praised by the Gods, gave full assent,And Gods and sages homeward went.
Footnotes

72:1 'The seven ancient rishis or saints, as has been said 
before, were the seven stars of Ursa Major. The seven 
other new saints which are here said to have been created by Vis'vámitra, should be seven new southern stars, a sort of new Ursa. Von Schlegel thinks that this mythical fiction of new stars created by Vis'vámitra may signify that these southern stars, unknown to the Indians as long as they remained in the neighbourhood of the Ganges, became known to them at a later date when they colonized the southern regions of Indra.' GORRESIO.
Next: Canto LXI: S'unahs'epha.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXI: S'UNAHS'EPHA.
Then Vis'vámitra, when the Blest
Had sought their homes of heavenly rest,Thus, mighty Prince, his counsel laidBefore the dwellers of the shade:'The southern land where now we areOffers this check our rites to bar: 
1b
To other regions let us speed,And ply our tasks from trouble freed.Now turn we to the distant west.To Pushkar's  
2b wood where hermits rest,
And there to rites austere apply,For not a grove with that can vie.'
The saint, in glory's light arrayed,
In Pushkar's wood his dwelling made,And living there on roots and fruitDid penance stern and resolute.
The king who filled Ayodhyá's throne,
By Ambarísha's name far known,At that same time, it chanced, beganA sacrificial rite to plan.But Indra took by force away

The charger that the king would slay.
The victim lost, the Bráhman spedTo Ambarísha's side, and said:'Gone is the steed, O King, and thisIs due to thee, in care remiss.
p. 73
Such heedless faults will kings destroyWho fail to guard what they enjoy.The flaw is desperate: we needThe charger, or a man to bleed.Quick! bring a man if not the horse,That so the rite may have its course.'
The glory of Ikshváku's line
Made offer of a thousand kine,And sought to buy at lordly priceA victim for the sacrifice.To many a distant land he drove,To many a people, town, and grove,And holy shades where hermits rest,Pursuing still his eager quest.At length on Bhrigu's sacred heightThe saint Richika met his sightSitting beneath the holy boughs.His children near him, and his spouse.
The mighty lord drew near, assayed

To win his grace, and reverence paid;
And then the sainted king addressedThe Bráhman saint with this request:'Bought with a hundred thousand kine,Give me, O Sage, a son of thineTo be a victim in the rite,And thanks the favour shall requite.For I have roamed all countries round,Nor sacrificial victim found.Then, gentle Hermit, deign to spareOne child amid the number there.'
Then to the monarch's speech replied
The hermit, penance-glorified:'For countless kine, for hills of gold,Mine eldest son shall ne'er be sold.'But, when she heard the saint's reply,The children's mother, standing nigh,Words such as these in answer saidTo Ambarisha, monarch dread:'My lord, the saint, has spoken well:His eldest child he will not sell.And know, great Monarch, that aboveTht rest my youngest born I love.'Tis ever thus: the father's joyIs centred in his eldest boy.The mother loves her darling bestWhom last she reeked upon her breast:My youngest I will ne'er forsake.'

As thus the sire and mother spake,
Young S'unahs'epha, of the threeThe midmost, cried unurged and free:'My sire withholds his eldest son,My mother keeps her youngest one:Then take me with thee, King: I weenThe son is sold who comes between.'The king with joy his home resought,And took the prize his kine had bought.He bade the youth his car ascend,And hastened back the rites to end. 
1
Footnotes
72:1b 'This cannot refer to the events just related: for 
Vis'vámitra was successful in the sacrifice performed 
for Tris'anku. And yet no other impediment is mentioned. Still his restless mind would not allow him to remain longer in the same spot. So the character of Vis'vámitra is ingeniously and skilfully shadowed forth: as he had been formerly a most warlike king, loving battle and glory, bold, active, sometimes unjust, and more frequently magnanimous, such also he always shows himself in his character of anchorite and ascetic.' SCHLEGEL.

72:2b Near the modern city of Ajmere. The place is 
sacred still, and the name is preserved in the Hindí. 
Lassen, however, says that this Pushkala or Pushkara, 
called by the Grecian writers Πευκελ••τις, the earliest 
place of pilgrimage mentioned by name, is not to be confounded with the modern Pushkara in Ajmere.
73:1 Ambarisha is the twenty-ninth in descent from 
Ikshváku, and is therefore separated by an immense 
space of time from Tris'anku in whose story Vis'vámitra had played so important a part. Yet Richíka, who is represented as having young sons while Ambarísha was yet reigning, being himself the son of Bhrigu and to be numbered with the most ancient sages, is said to have married the younger sister of Vis'vámitra. But I need not again remark that there is a perpetual anachronism in Indian mythology.' SCHLEGEL. 
'In the mythical story related in this and the following 
Canto we may discover, I think, some indication of the epoch at which the immolation of lower animals was substituted for human sacrifice.... 
So when Iphigenia was about to be sacrificed at Aulis, 
one legend tells us that a hind was substituted for the virgin.'                                             GORRESIO. 
So the ram caught in the thicket took the place of Isaac, 

or, as the Musalmáns say, of Ishmael.
Next: Canto LXII.: Ambaresha's Sacrifice.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXII.: AMBARESHA'S 
SACRIFICE.
As thus the king that youth conveyed,
His weary steeds at length he stayedAt height of noon their rest to takeUpon the bank of Pushkar's lake.There while the king enjoyed reposeThe captive S'unahs'epha rose,And hasting to the water's sideHis uncle Visvamitra spied,With many a hermit 'neath the treesEngaged in stern austerities.
Distracted with the toil and thirst,
With woeful mien, away he burst,Swift to the hermit's breast he flew,And weeping thus began to sue:'No sire nave I, no mother dear,No kith or kin my heart to cheer:As justice bids, O Hermit, deignTo save me from the threatened pain.O thou to whom the wretched flee,And find a saviour, Saint, in thee,Now let the king obtain his will,

And me my length of days fulfil,
That rites austere I too may share,May rise to heaven and rest me there.With tender soul and gentle browBe guardian of the orphan thou,And as a father pities, soPreserve me from my fear and woe.'
When Vísvámitra, glorious saint,
Had heard the boy's heart-rending plaint.He soothed his grief, his tears he dried,
p. 74
Then called his sons to him, and cried:'The time is come for you to showThe duty and the aid bestowFor which, regarding future life,A man gives children to his wife.This hermit's son, whom here you seeA suppliant, refuge seeks with me.O sons, the friendless youth befriend,And, pleasing me, his life defend.For holy works you all have wrought,True to the virtuous life I taught.Go, and as victims doomed to bleed,Die, and Lord Agni's hunger feed,So shall the rite completed end,This orphan gain a saving friend,

Due offerings to the Gods be paid,
And your own father's voice obeyed.'
Then Madhushyand and all the rest
Answered their sire with scorn and jest:'What! aid to others' sons afford,And leave thine own to die, my lord!To us it seems a horrid deed,As 'twere on one's own flesh to feed.'
The hermit heard his sons' reply,
And burning rage inflamed his eye.Then forth his words of fury burst:'Audacious speech, by virtue cursed!It lifts on end each shuddering hair--My charge to scorn! my wrath to dare!You, like Vas'ishtha's evil brood,Shall make the flesh of dogs your foodA thousand years in many a birth,And punished thus shall dwell on earth.'
Thus on his sons his curse he laid.
Then calmed again that youth dismayed,And blessed him with his saving aid;'When in the sacred fetters bound,And with a purple garland crowned,At Vishnu's post thou standest tied,With lauds be Agni glorified.And these two hymns of holy praise

Forget not, Hermit's son, to raise
In the king's rite, and thou shalt beLord of thy wish, preserved, and free.'
He learnt the hymns with mind intent,
And from the hermit's presence went.To Ambarísha thus he spake:'Let us our onward journey take.Haste to thy home, O King, nor stayThe lustral rites with slow delay.'
The boy's address the monarch cheered,
And soon the sacred ground he neared.The convocation's high decreeDeclared the youth from blemish free;Clothed in red raiment he was tiedA victim at the pillar's side.There bound, the Fire-God's hymn he raised,And Indra and Upendra praised.Thousand-eyed Vishnu, pleased to hearThe mystic laud, inclined his ear,And won by worship, swift to save,Long life to S'unahs'epha gave.The King in bounteous measure gainedThe fruit of sacrifice ordained,By grace of Him who rules the skies,Lord Indra of the thousand eyes.
And Vis'vámitra evermore.

Pursued his task on Pushkar's shore
Until a thousand years had pastIn fierce austerity and fast.
Next: Canto LXIII.: Menaká.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIII.: MENAKÁ.
A thousand years had thus flown by
When all the Gods within the sky,Eager that he the fruit might gainOf fervent rite and holy pain,Approached the great ascetic, nowBathed alter toil and ended vow.Then Brahmá speaking for the restWith sweetest words the sage addressed:'Hail, Saint! This high and holy nameThy rites have won, thy merits claim.'
Thus spoke the Lord whom Gods revere.
And sought again his heavenly sphere.But Vis'vámitra, more intent,His mind to sterner penance bent.
So many a season rolled away,
When Menaká, fair nymph, one dayCame down from Paradise to laveHer perfect limbs in Pushkar's wave,The glorious son of Kus'ik sawThat peerless shape without a flawFlash through the flood's translucent shroud

Like lightning gleaning through a cloud.
He saw her in that lone retreat,Most beautiful from head to feet,And by Kandarpas 
1 might subdued
He thus addressed her as he viewed:'Welcome, sweet nymph! O deign, I pray,In these calm shades awhile to stay.To me some gracious favour show,For love has set my breast aglow.'
He spoke. The fairest of the fair
Made for awhile her dwelling there,While day by day the wild delightStayed vow austere and fervent riteThere as tne winsome charmer woveHer spells around him in the grove,And bound him in a golden chain,Five sweet years fled, and five again.Then Vis'vámitra woke to shame,And, fraught with anguish, memory cameFor quick he knew, with anger fired,That all the Immortals had conspired
p. 75
To lap his careless soul in ease,And mar his long austerities.'Ten years have past, each day and nightUnheeded in delusive flight.

So long my fervent rites were stayed,
While thus I lay by love betrayed.'As thus long sighs the hermit heaved,And, touched with deep repentance, grieved,He saw the fair one standing nighWith suppliant hands and trembling eye.With gentle words he bade her go,Then sought the northern hills of snow.With firm resolve he vowed to beatThe might of love beneath his feet.Still northward to the distant sideOf Kaus'ikí, 
1 the hermit hide,
And gave his life to penance thereWith rites austere most hard to bear.A thousand years went by, and stillHe laboured on the northern hillWith pains so terrible and drearThat all the Gods were chilled with fear,And Gods and saints, for swift advice,Met in the halls of Paradise.'Let Kus'ik's son,' they counselled, beA Mighty saint by just decree.'His ear to hear their counsel lentThe Sire of worlds, omnipotent.To him enriched by rites severeHe spoke in accents sweet to hear:'Hail, Mighty Saint! dear son, all hail!Thy fervour wins, thy toils prevail.Won by thy vows and zeal intense

I give this high preëminence.'
He to the General Sire replied,
Not sad, nor wholly satisfied:
'When thou, O Brahmá, shalt declareThe title, great beyond compare,Of Bráhman saint my worthy meed,Hard earned by many a holy deed,Then may I deem in sooth I holdEach sense of body well controlled.'Then Brahmá cried, 'Not yet, not yet:Toil on awhile O Anchoret!'
Thus having said to heaven he went,
The saint, upon his task intent,Began his labours to renew,Which sterner yet and fiercer grew.His arms upraised, without a rest,With but one foot the earth he pressed;The air his food, the hermit stoodStill as a pillar hewn from wood.Around him in the summer daysFive mighty fires combined to blaze.In floods of rain no veil was spreadSave clouds, to canopy his head.In the dank dews both night and dayCouched in the stream the hermit lay.Thus, till a thousand years had fled,He plied his task of penance dread.

Then Vishnu and the Gods with awe
The labours of the hermit saw,And S'akra, in his troubled breast,Lord of the skies, his fear confessed.And brooded on a plan to spoilThe merits of the hermit's toil.Encompassed by his Gods of StormHe summoned Rambhá, fair of form,And spoke a speech for woe and weal,The saint to mar, the God to heal.
Footnotes
74:1 The Indian Cupid.
75:1 'The same as she whose praises Vis'vámitra has 
already sung in Canto XXXV, and whom the poet 
brings yet alive upon the scene in Canto LXI. Her proper name was Satyavatí (Truthful); the patronymic, Kaus'ikí was preserved by the river into which she is said to have been changed, and is still recognized in the corrupted forms Kus'a and Kus'i. The river flows from the heights of the Himálaya towards the Ganges, bounding on the east the country of Videha (Behar). The name is no doubt half hidden in the Cosoagus of Pliny and the Kossounos of Arrian. But each author has 

fallen into the same error in his enumeration of these 
rivers (Condochatem, Erannoboam, Cosoagum, Sonum). The Erannoboas, (Hiranyaváha) and the Sone are not different streams, but well-known names of the same river. Moreover the order is disturbed, in which on the right and left they fall into the Ganges. To be consistent with geography it should be written: Erannoboam sive Sonum, Condochatem (Gandakí), Cosoagum.' SCHLEGEL.
Next: Canto LXIV.: Rambhá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIV.: RAMBHÁ.
'A great emprise, O lovely maid,
To save the Gods, awaits thine aid:To bind the son of Kus'ik sure,And take his soul with love's sweet lure.'Thus orderd by the Thousand-eyedThe suppliant nymph in fear replied:'O Lord of Gods, this mighty sageIs very fierce and swift to rage.I doubt not, he so dread and sternOn me his scorching wrath will turn.Of this, my lord, am I afraid:Have mercy on a timid maid.'Her suppliant hands began to shake,When thus again Lord Indra spake:'O Rambhá, drive thy fears away,And as I bid do thou obey.In Koïl's form, who takes the heartWhen trees in spring to blossom start,I, with Kandarpa for my friend,Close to thy side mine aid will lend.
p. 76
Do thou thy beauteous splendour arm

With every grace and winsome charm,
And from his awful rites seduceThis Kus'ik's son, the stern recluse.'
Lord Indra ceased. The nymph obeyed;
In all her loveliest charms arrayed,With winning ways and witching smileShe sought the hermit to beguile.The sweet note of that tuneful birdThe saint with ravished bosom heard,And on his heart a rapture passedAs on the nymph a look he cast.But when he heard the bird prolongHis sweet incomparable song,And saw the nymph with winning smile,The hermit's heart perceiv'd the wile.And straight he knew the Thousand-eyedA plot against his peace had tried.Then Kus'ik's son indignant laidHis curse upon the heavenly maid:'Because thou wouldst my soul engageWho fight to conquer love and rage,Stand, till ten thousand years have flown,Ill-fated maid, transformed to stone.A Bráhman then, in glory strong,Mighty through penance stern and long,Shall free thee from thine altered shape;Thou from my curse shalt then escape.'But when the saint had cursed her so,

His breast was burnt with fires of woe,
Grieved that long effort to restrainHis mighty wrath was all in vain.Cursed by the angry sage's power,She stood in stone that selfsame hour.Kandarpa heard the words he said,And quickly from his presence fled.His fall beneath his passion's swayHad reft the hermit's meed away.Unconquered yet his secret foes,The humbled saint refused repose:'No more shall rage my bosom till,Sealed be my lips, my tongue be still.My very breath henceforth I holdUntil a thousand years are told:Victorious o'er each erring sense,I'll dry my frame with abstinence,Until by penance duly doneA Bráhman's rank be bought and won.For countless yearn, as still as death.I taste no food, I draw no breath,And as I toil my frame shall standUnharmed by time's destroying hand.'
Next: Canto LXV.: Vis'vámitra's Triumph

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXV.: VIS'VÁMITRA'S TRIUMPH
Then from Himálaya's heights of snow,
The glorious saint prepared to go,And dwelling in the distant eastHis penance and his toil increased.A thousand years his lips he heldClosed by a vow unparalleled,And other marvels passing thought,Unrivalled in the world, he wrought.In all the thousand years his frameDry as a log of wood became.By many a cross and check beset,Rage had not stormed his bosom yet.With iron will that naught could bendHe plied his labour till the end.So when the weary years were o'er,Freed from his vow so stern and sore,The hermit, all his penance sped,Sate down to eat his meal of bread.Then Indra, clad in Bráhman guise,Asked him for food with hungry eyes.The mighty saint, with steadfast soul,To the false Bráhman gave the whole,And when no scrap for him remained,Fasting and faint, from speech refrained.

His silent vow he would not break:
No breath he heaved, no word he spakeThen as he checked his breath, behold!Around his brow thick smoke-clouds rolledAnd the three worlds, as if o'erspreadWith ravening flames, were filled with dread.Then God and saint and bard, convened.And Nága lord, and snake, and fiend,Thus to the General Father cried,Distracted, sad, and terrified:'Against the hermit, sore assailed,Lure, scathe, and scorn have naught availed,Proof against rage and treacherous artHe keeps his vow with constant heart.Now if his toils assist him naughtTo gain the boon his soul has sought,He through the worlds will ruin sendThat fixt and moving things shall end,The regions now are dark with doom,No friendly ray relieves the gloom.Each ocean foams with maddened tideThe shrinking hills in fear subside.Trembles the earth with feverous throeThe wind in fitful tempest blows.No cure we see with troubled eyes:And atheist brood on earth may rise.The triple world is wild with care,Or spiritless in dull despair.Before that saint the sun is dim,

His blessed light eclipsed by him.
Now ere the saint resolve to bringDestruction on each living thing,Let us appease, while yet we may,Him bright as fire, like fire to slay.Yea, as the fiery flood of FateLays all creation desolate.He o'er the conquered Gods may reign:O, grant him what he longs to gain.'
p. 77
Then all the Blest, by Brahmá led,Approached the saint and sweetly said:'Hail, Bráhman Saint! for such thy place:Thy vows austere have won our grace.A Bráhman's rank thy penance sternAnd ceaseless labour richly earn.I with the Gods of Storm decreeLong life, O Bráhman Saint, to thee.May peace and joy thy soul possess;Go where thou wilt in happiness.'
Thus by the General Sire addressed,
Joy and high triumph filled his breast.His head in adoration bowed,Thus spoke he to the Immortal crowd:'If I, ye Gods, have gained at lastBoth length of days and Bráhman caste,Grant that the high mysterious name,

And holy Vedas, own my claim,
And that the formula to blessThe sacrifice, its lord confess.And let Vas'ishtha, who excelsIn Warriors' art and mystic spells,In love of God without a peer.Confirm the boon you promise here.'
With Brahmá's son Vas'ishtha, best
Of those who pray with voice repressed,The Gods by earnest prayer prevailed,And thus his new-made friend he hailed:'Thy title now is sure and goodTo rights of saintly Bráhmanhood.'Thus spake the sage. The Gods, content,Back to their heavenly mansions went.And Vis'vamitra, pious-souled,Among the Bráhman saints enrolled,On reverend Vas'ishtha pressedThe honours due to holy guest.Successful in his high pursuit,The sage, in penance resolute,Walked in his pilgrim wanderings o'erThe whole broad land from shore to shore.'Twas thus the saint, O Raghu's son,His rank among the Bráhmans won.Best of all hermits, Prince, is he;In him incarnate Penance see.Friend of the right, who shrinks from ill,

Heroic powers attend him still.'
The Bráhman, versed in ancient lore,
Thus closed his tale, and said no more,To S'atánanda Kus'ik's sonCried in delight, Well done! well done!Then Janak, at the tale amazed,Spoke thus with suppliant hands upraised:'High fate is mine, O Sage, I deem,And thanks I owe for bliss supreme,That thou and Raghu's children tooHave come my sacrifice to view.To look on thee with blessed eyesExalts my soul and purifies.Yea, thus to see thee face to faceEnriches me with store of grace.Thy holy labours wrought of old,And mighty penance, fully told,Ráma and I with great delightHave heard, O glorious Anchorite.Unrivalled thine ascetic deeds:Thy might, O Saint, all might exceeds.No thought may scan, no limit boundThe virtues that in thee are found.The story of thy wondrous fateMy thirsty ears can never sate.The hour of evening rites is near:The sun declines in swift career.At early dawn, O Hermit, deign

To let me see thy face again.
Best of ascetics, part in bliss:Do thou thy servant now dismiss.'
The saint approved, and glad and kind
Dismissed the king with joyful mindAround the sage King Janak wentWith priests and kinsmen reverent.Then Vis'vámitra, honoured so,By those high-minded, rose to go,And with the princes took his wayTo seek the lodging where they lay.
Next: Canto LXVI.: Janak's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVI.: JANAK'S SPEECH.
With cloudless lustre rose the sun;
The king, his morning worship done,Ordered hid heralds to inviteThe princes and the anchorite.With honour, as the laws decree,The monarch entertained the three.Then to the youths and saintly manVideha's lord this speech began:'O blameless Saint, most welcome thou!If I may please thee tell me how.Speak, mighty lord, whom all revere,'Tis thine to order, mine to hear.'
Thus he on mighty thoughts intent;
Then thus the sage most eloquent:'King Das'aratha's sons, this pairOf warriors famous everywhere,Are come that best of bows to seeThat lies a treasure stored by thee.This, mighty Janak, deign to show,That they may look upon the bow,And then, contented, homeward go.'Then royal Janak spoke in turn:'O best of Saints, the story learn

Why this famed bow, a noble prize,
A treasure in my palace lies.A monarch, Devarát by name,Who sixth from ancient Nimi came,Held it as ruler of the land,A pledge in his successive hand.This bow the mighty Rudra bore
p. 78
At Daksha's 1 sacrifice of yore,
When carnage of the Immortals stainedThe rite that Daksha had ordained.Then as the Gods sore wounded fled,Victorious Rudra, mocking, said:'Because, O Gods, ye gave me naughtWhen I my rightful portion sought,Your dearest parts I will not spare,But with my bow your frames will tear.'
The Sons of Heaven, in wild alarm,
Soft flatteries tried his rage to charm.Then Bhava, Lord whom Gods adore,Grew kind and friendly as before,And every torn and mangled limbWas safe and sound restored by him.Thenceforth this bow, the gem of bows,That freed the God of Gods from foes,Stored by our great forefathers lay

A treasure and a pride for aye.
Once, as it chanced, I ploughed the ground,When sudden, 'neath the share was foundAn infant springing from the earth,Named Sitá from her secret birth.  
2
In strength and grace the maiden grew,My cherished daughter, fair to view.I vowed her, of no mortal birth,Meet prize for noblest hero's worth.In strength and grace the maiden grew,And many a monarch came to woo.To all the princely suitors IGave, mighty Saint, the same reply:'I give not thus my daughter, shePrize of heroic worth shall be.  
3
To Mithilá the suitors pressedTheir power and might to manifest.To all who came with hearts aglowI offered S'iva's wondrous bow.
Not one of all the royal band
Could raise or take the bow in hand.The suitors' puny might I spurned,And back the feeble princes turned.Enraged thereat, the warriors met,With force combined my town beset.Stung to the heart with scorn and shame,With war and threats they madly came,Besieged my peaceful walls, and long

To Mithilá did grievous wrong.
There, wasting all, a year they lay,And brought my treasures to decay,Filling my soul, O Hermit chief,With bitter woe and hopeless grief.At last by long-wrought penance IWon favour with the Gods on high,Who with my labours well contentA four-fold host to aid me sent.Then swift the baffled heroes fledTo all the winds discomfited--Wrong-doers, with their lords and host,And all their valour's idle boast.This heavenly bow, exceeding bright,These youths shall see, O Anchorite.Then if young Ráma's hand can stringThe bow that baffled lord and king,To him I give, as I have sworn,My Sitá, not of woman born.'
Footnotes
78:1 'Daksha was one of the ancient Progenitors or 
Prajápatis created by Brahmá. The sacrifice which is 
here spoken of and in which S'ankar or S'iva (called also here Rudra and Bhava) smote the Gods because he had not been invited to share the sacred oblations with 

them, seems to refer to the origin of the worship of 
S'iva, to its increase and to the struggle it maintained with other older forms of worship.' GORRESIO.
78:2 Sítá means a furrow. 
         'Great Erectheus swayed,   That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,   But from the teeming furrow took his birth,   The mighty offspring of the foodful earth.'
                                          Iliad, Book II.
78:3 'The whole story of Sítá, as will be seen in the 
course of the poem has a great analogy with the ancient 
myth of Proserpine.' GORRESIO.
Next: Canto LXVII.: The Breaking of The Bow.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVII.: THE BREAKING OF THE 
BOW.
Then spoke again the great recluse:
'This mighty bow, O King, produce.'King Janak, at the saint's request,This order to his train addressed:'Let the great bow be hither borne,Which flowery wreaths and scents adorn.'Soon as the monarch's words were said,His servants to the city sped,Five thousand youths in number, allOf manly strength and stature tall,The ponderous eight-wheeled chest that heldThe heavenly bow, with toil propelled.At length they brought that iron chest,And thus the godlike king addressed:'This best of bows, O lord, we bring,Respected by each chief and king,And place it for these youths to see,If, Sovereign, such thy pleasure be.'
With suppliant palm to palm applied
King Janak to the strangers cried:'This gem of bows, O Bráhman Sage,

Our race has prized from age to age.
Too strong for those who yet have reigned,Though great in might each nerve they strained.
p. 79
Titan and fiend its strength defies,God, spirit, minstrel of the skies.And bard above and snake belowAre baffled by this glorious bow.Then how may human prowess hopeWith such a bow as this to cope?What man with valour's choicest giftThis bow can draw, or string, or lift?Yet let the princes, holy Seer,Behold it: it is present here.'
Then spoke the hermit pious-souled:
'Ráma, dear son, the bow behold.'Then Ráma at his word unclosedThe chest wherein its might reposed,Thus crying, as he viewed it: 'Lo!I lay mine hand upon the bow:May happy luck my hope attendIts heavenly strength to lift or bend.''Good luck be thine,' the hermit cried:'Assay the task!' the king replied.Then Raghu's son, as if in sport,Before the thousands of the court,

The weapon by the middle raised
That all the crowd in wonder gazed.With steady arm the string he drewTill burst the mighty bow in two.As snapped the bow, an awful clang,Loud as the shriek of tempests, rang.The earth, affrighted, shook amainAs when a hill is rent in twain.Then, senseless at the fearful sound,The people fell upon the ground:None save the king, the princely pair,And the great saint, the shock could bear,
When woke to sense the stricken train,
And Janak's soul was calm again,With suppliant hands and reverent head,These words, most eloquent, he said:'O Saint, Prince Ráma stands alone:His peerless might he well has shown.A marvel has the hero wroughtBeyond belief, surpassing thought.My child, to royal Ráma wed,New glory on our line will shed:And true my promise will remainThat hero's worth the bride should gain.Dearer to me than light and life,My Sitá shall be Ráma's wife.If thou, O Bráhman, leave concede,My counsellors, with eager speed,

Borne in their flying cars, to fair
Ayodhyá's town the news shall bear,With courteous message to entreatThe king to grace my royal seat.This to the monarch shall they tell,The bride is his who won her well:And his two sons are resting hereProtected by the holy seer.So, at his pleasure, let them leadThe sovereign to my town with speed.'
The hermit to his prayer inclined
And Janak, lord of virtuous mind,With charges, to Ayodhyá sentHis ministers: and forth they went.
Next: Canto LXVIII.: The Envoys' Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVIII.: THE ENVOYS' SPEECH.
Three nights upon the road they passed
To rest the steeds that bore them fast,And reached Ayodhyá's town at last.Then straight at Das'aratha's callThey stood within the royal hall,Where, like a God, inspiring awe,The venerable king they saw.With suppliant palm to palm applied,And all their terror laid aside,They spoke to him upon the throneWith modest words, in gentle tone:'Janak, Videha's king, O Sire,Has sent us hither to inquireThe health of thee his friend most dear,Of all thy priests and every peer.Next Kus'ik's son consenting, thusKing Janak speaks, dread liege, by us:'I made a promise and decreeThat valour's prize my child should be.Kings, worthless found in worth's assay,With mien dejected turned away.Thy sons, by Vis'vámitra led,Unurged, my city visited,And peerless in their might have gained

My daughter, as my vow ordained.
Full in a vast assembly's viewThy hero Ráma broke in twoThe gem of bows, of monstrous size,That came a treasure from the skies.Ordained the prize of hero's might,Sitá my child is his by right.Fain would I keep my promise made,If thou, O King, approve and aid.Come to my town thy son to see:Bring holy guide and priest with thee.O lord of kings, my suit allow,And let me keep my promised vow.So joying for thy children's sakeTheir triumph too shalt thou partake,With Vis'vámitra's high consent.''Such words with friendship eloquentSpoke Janak, fair Videha's king,By S'atánanda's counselling.'
The envoys thus the king addressed,
And mighty joy his heart possessed.To Vámadeva quick he cried,Vas'ishtha, and his lords beside:'Lakshman, and he, my princely hoyWho fills Kaus'alyá's soul with joy,By Vis'vámitra guarded wellAmong the good Videhans dwell.

p. 80
Their ruler Janak, prompt to own
The peerless might my child has shown,To him would knit in holy tiesHis daughter, valour's lovely prize.If Janak's plan seem good to you,Come, speed we to his city too,Nor let occasion idly by.'
He ceased. There came a glad reply
From priest and mighty saint and allThe councillors who thronged the hall.Then cried the king with joyous heart:'To-morrow let us all depart.'
That night the envoys entertained
With honour and all care remained.
Next: Canto LXIX.: Das'aratha's Visit.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIX.: DAS'ARATHA'S VISIT.
Soon as the shades of night had fled,
Thus to the wise Sumantra saidThe happy king, while priest and peer,Each in his place, were standing near:'Let all my treasurers to-day,Set foremost in the long array,With gold and precious gems suppliedIn bounteous store, together ride.And send you out a mighty force,Foot, chariot, elephant, and horse.Besides, let many a car of state,And noblest steeds, my will await.Vas'ishtha, Vámadeva sage,And Márkandeya's reverend age,Jáváli, Kas'yap's godlike seed,And wise Kátyáyana, shall lead.Thy care, Sumantra, let it beTo yoke a chariot now for me,That so we part without delay:These envoys hasten me away.'
So fared he forth. That host, with speed,
Quadruple, as the king decreed,With priests to head the bright array,

Followed the monarch on his way.
Four days they travelled on the road,And eve Videha's kingdom showed.Janak had left his royal seatThe venerable king to greet,And, noblest, with these words addressedThat noblest lord, his happy guest:'Hail, best of kings: a blessed fateHas led thee, Monarch, to my state.Thy sons, supreme in high emprise,Will gladden now their father's eyes.And high my fate, that hither leadsVas'ishtha, bright with holy deeds,Girt with these sages far-renowned,Like Indra with the Gods around.Joy! joy! for vanquished are my foes:Joy! for my house in glory grows,With Raghu's noblest sons allied,Supreme in strength and valour's pride.To-morrow with its early lightWill shine on my completed rite.Then, sanctioned by the saints and thee,The marriage of thy Ráma see.'
Then Das'aratha, best of those
Whose speech in graceful order flows,With gathered saints on every side,Thus to the lord of earth replied:'A truth is this I long have known,

A favour is the giver's own.
What thou shalt bid, O good and true,We, as our power permits, will do.'
That answer of the truthful lord,
With virtuous worth and honour stored,Janak, Videha's noble king,Heard gladly, greatly marvelling.With bosoms filled with pleasure metLong-parted saint and anchoret,And linked in friendship's tie they spentThe peaceful night in great content.
Ráma and Lakshman thither sped,
By sainted Vis'vámitra led,And bent in filial love to greetTheir father, and embraced his feet.The aged king, rejoiced to hearAnd see again his children dear,Honoured by Janak's thoughtful care,With great enjoyment rested there.King Janak, with attentive heed,Consulted first his daughters' need,And ordered all to speed the rite;Then rested also for the night.
Next: Canto LXX.: The Maidens Sought.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXX.: THE MAIDENS SOUGHT.
Then with the morn's returning sun.
King Janak, when his rites were done,Skilled all the charms of speech to know,Spoke to wise S'atánanda so:'My brother, lord of glorious fame,My younger, Kus'adhwaj by name,Whose virtuous life has won renown,Has settled in a lovely town,Sánkásyá, decked with grace divine,Whose glories bright as Pushpak's shine,While Ikshumatí rolls her waveHer lofty rampart's foot to lave.Him, holy priest, I long to see:The guardian of my rite is he:That my dear brother may not missA share of mine expected bliss.'
Thus in the presence of the priest
The royal Janak spoke, and ceased.Then came his henchmen, prompt and brave,
p. 81

To whom his charge the monarch gave.
Soon as they heard his will, in hasteWith fleetest steeds away they raced,To lead with them that lord of kings,As Indra's call Lord Vishnu brings.Sánkás'yá's walls they duly gained,And audience of the king obtained.To him they told the news they broughtOf marvels past and Janak's thought.Soon as the king the story knewFrom those good envoys swift and true,To Janak's wish he gave assent,And swift to Mithilá he went.He paid to Janak reverence due,And holy S'atánanda too,Then sate him on a glorious seatFor kings or Gods celestial meet.Soon as the brothers, noble pairPeerless in might, were seated there,They gave the wise Sudáman, bestOf councillors, their high behest:'Go, noble councillor,' they cried,'And hither to our presence guideIkshváku's son, Ayodhyá's lord,Invincible by foeman's sword,With both his sons, each holy seer,And every minister and peer.'Sudáman to the palace flew,And saw the mighty king who threw

Splendour on Raghu's splendid race,
Then bowed his head with seemly grace:'O King, whose hand Ayodhyá sways,My lord, whom Mithilá obeys,Yearns with desire, if thou agree,Thee with thy guide and priest to see.'Soon as the councillor had ceased,The king, with saint and peer and priest,Sought, speeding through the palace gate,The hall where Janak held his state.There, with his nobles round him spread,Thus to Videha's lord be said:'Thou knowest, King, whose aid divineProtects Ikshváku's royal line.In every need, whate'er befall,The saint Vas'ishtha speaks for all.If Vis'vámitra so allow,And all the saints around me now,The sage will speak, at my desire,As order and the truth require.'   Soon as the king his lips had stilled.Up rose Vas'ishtha, speaker skilled.And to Videha's lord beganIn flowing words that holy man:'From viewless Nature Brahmá rose,No change, no end, no waste he knows.A son had he Maríchi styled,And Kas'yap was Maríchi's child.From him Vivasvat sprang: from him

Manu whose fame shall ne'er be dim.
Manu, who life to mortals gave,Begot Ikshváku good and brave.First of Ayodhyá's kings was he,Pride of her famous dynasty.From him the glorious Kukshi sprang,Whose fame through all the regions rang.Rival of Kukshi's ancient fame,His heir, the great Vikukshi, came,His son was Vána, lord of might;His Anaranya, strong to fight.His son was Prithu, glorious name;From him the good Tris'anku came.He left a son renowned afar,Known by the name of Dhundhumár.His son, who drove the mighty car,Was Yuvanás'va, feared in war.He passed away. Him followed thenHis son Mándhátá, king of men.His son was blest in high emprise,Susandhi, fortunate and wise.Two noble sons had he, to witDhruvasandhi and Prasenajit.Bharat was Dhruvasandhi's son,And glorious fame that monarch won.The warrior Asit he begot.Asit had warfare, fierce and hot,With rival kings in many a spot,Haihayas, Tálajanghas styled,

And S'as'ivindus, strong and wild.
Long time he strove, but forced to yieldFled from his kingdom and the field.With his two wives away he fledWhere high Himálaya lifts his head,And, all his wealth and glory past,He paid the dues of Fate at last.The wives he left had both conceived--So is the ancient tale believed--One, of her rival's hopes afraidFell poison in her viands laid.It chanced that Chyavan, Bhrigu's child,Had wandered to that pathless wild,And there Himálaya's lovely heightDetained him with a strange delight.There came the other widowed queen,With lotus eyes and beauteous mien,Longing a noble son to bear,And wooed the saint with earnest prayer.When thus Kálindi,  
1 fairest dame,
With reverent supplication came,To her the holy sage replied:'Born with the poison from thy side,O happy Queen, shall spring ere longAn infant fortunate and strong.Then weep no more, and check thy sighs,Sweet lady of the lotus eyes.'The queen, who loved her perished lord,For meet reply, the saint adored,

And, of her husband long bereaved,
She bore a son by him conceived.Because her rival mixed the bane
p. 82
To render her conception vain,And fruit unripened to destroy,Sagar  
1 she called her darling boy.
To Sagar Asamanj was heir:Bright Ans'umán his consort bare.Ans'umán's son, Dilipa famed,Begot a son Bhagírath named.From him the great Kakutstha rose:From him came Raghu, feared by foes,Of him sprang Purushádak bold,Fierce hero of gigantic mould:Kalmáshapáda's name he bore,Because his feet were spotted o'er.  
2
From him came S'ankan, and from himSudars'an, fair in face and limb.From beautiful Sudars'an camePrince Agnivarna, bright as flame.His son was S'íghraga, for speedUnmatched; and Maru was his seed.Pras'uœs'ruka was Maru's child;His son was Ambarísha styled.Nahush was Ambarísha's heir,The mighty lord of regions fair:

Nahush begot Yayáti: he,
Nábhág of happy destiny.Son of Nábhág was Aja: his,The glorious Das'aratha is,Whose noble children boast to beRáma and Lakshman, whom we see.Thus do those kings of purest raceTheir lineage from Ikshváku trace;Their hero lives the right maintained,Their lips with falsehood ne'er were stained.In Ráma's and in Lakshman's nameThy daughters as their wives I claim,So shall in equal bands be tiedEach peerless youth with peerless bride.'
Footnotes
81:1 A different lady from the Goddess of the Jumna 
who bears the same name.
Next: Canto LXXI.: Janak's Pedigree.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXI.: JANAK'S PEDIGREE.
Then to the saint supremely wise
King Janak spoke in suppliant guise:'Deign, Hermit, with attentive ear,Mv race's origin to hear.When kings a daughter's hand bestow,'Tis right their line and fame to show.There was a king whose deeds and worthSpread wide his name through heaven and earth,
Nimi, most virtuous e'en from youth,
The best of all who love the truth,His son and heir was Mithi, andHis Janak, first who ruled this land.He left a son Udávasu,Blest with all virtues, good and true.His son was Nandivardhan, dearFor pious heart and worth sincere.His son Suketu, hero brave,To Devarát, existence gave.King Devarát, a royal sage,For virtue, glory of the age,Begot Vrihadratha; and heBegot, his worthy heir to be,The splendid hero Mahábir

Who long in glory governed here.
His son was Sudhriti, a youthFirm in his purpose, brave in sooth,His son was Dhristaketu, blestWith pious will and holy breast.The fame of royal saint he won:Haryas'va was his princely son.Haryas'va's son was Maru, whoBegot Pratíndhak, wise and true.Next Kírtiratha held the throne,His son, for gentle virtues known.Then followed Devamidha, thenVibudh, Mahándhrak, kings of men.Mahándhrak's son, of boundless might,Was Kírtirát, who loved the right.He passed away, a sainted king,And Maháromá followingTo Swarnaromá left the state.Then Hras'varomá, good and great,Succeeded, and to him a pairOf sons his royal consort bare,Elder of these I boast to be:Brave Kus'adhwaj is next to me.  
1b
Me then, the elder of the twain,My sire anointed here to reign.He bade me tend my brother well,Then to the forest went to dwell.He sought the heavens, and I sustainedThe burden as by law ordained,

And noble Kus'adhwaj, the peer
Of Gods, I ever held most dear.Then came Sánkás'yá's mighty lord,Sudhanvá, threatening siege and sword,And bade me swift on him bestowS'iva's incomparable bow,
p. 83
And Sítá of the lotus eyes:But I refused each peerless prize.Then, host to host, we met the foes,And fierce the din of battle rose,Sudhanvá, foremost of his band,Fell smitten by my single hand.When thus Sánkás'yá's lord was slain,I sanctified, as laws ordain,My brother in his stead to reign,Thus are we brothers, Saint most highThe younger he, the elder I.Now, mighty Sage, my spirit joysTo give these maidens to the boys.Let Sítá be to Ráma tied.And Urmilá be Lakshman's bride.First give, O King, the gift of cows,As dowry of each royal spouse,Due offerings to the spirits pay,And solemnize the wedding-day.The moon tonight, O royal Sage,

In Maghá's 1 House takes harbourage;
On the third night his rays benign
In second Phálguni 2 will shine:
Be that the day, with prosperous fate,The nuptial rites to celebrate.'
  
Footnotes
82:1 This is another fanciful derivation, Sa--with, and 
gara--poison.
82:2 Purushádak means a cannibal. First called Kalmáshapáda on account of his spotted feet he is said 
to have been turned into a cannibal for killing the son of Vas'ishtha.
82:1b 'In the setting forth of these royal genealogies the 
Bengal recension varies but slightly from the Northern. 
The first six names of the genealogy of the Kings of Ayodhyá are partly theogonical and partly cosmogonical; the other names are no doubt in accordance with tradition and deserve the same amount of credence as the ancient traditional genealogies of other nations.' GORRESIO.

Next: Canto LXXII.: The Gift of Kine.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXII.: THE GIFT OF KINE.
When royal Janak's words were done,
Joined with Vas'ishtha Kus'ik's son,The mighty sage began his speech:'No mind may soar, no thought can reachThe glories of Ikshváku's line,Or, great Videha's King, of thine:None in the whole wide world may vieWith them in fame and honours high.Well matched, I ween, in holy bands,These peerless pairs will join their hands.But hear me as I speak once more;Thy brother, skilled in duty's lore,Has at his home a royal pairOf daughters most divinely fair.I for the hands of these sweet twoFor Bharat and S'atrughna sue,Both princes of heroic mould,Wise, fair of form, and lofty-souled.All Das'aratha's sons, I ween,Own each young grace of form and mien:Brave as the Gods are they, nor yieldTo the great Lords the worlds who shield.
By these, good Prince of merits high,

Ikshváku's house with thine ally.'
The suit the holy sage preferred,
With willing ear the monarch heard:Vas'ishtha's lips the counsel praised:Then spake the king with hands upraised:'Now blest indeed my race I deem,Which your high will, O Saints supreme,With Das'aratha's house unitesIn bonds of love and marriage rites.So be it done. My nieces twainLet Bharat and S'atrughna gain,And the four youths the selfsame dayFour maiden hands in theirs shall lay.No day so lucky may compare,For marriage--so the wise declare--With the last day of PhálguniRuled by the genial deity.'Then with raised hands in reverence dueTo those arch-saints he spoke anew:'I am your pupil, ever true:To me high favour have ye shown;Come, sit ye on my royal throne,For Das'aratha rules these towersE'en as Ayodhyá now is ours.Do with your own whate'er ye choose:Your lordship here will none refuse.'
He spoke, and to Videha's king

Thus Das'aratha, answering:
'Boundless your virtues, lords, wbose swayThe realms of Mithilá obey.With honouring care you entertain.Both holy sage and royal train.Now to my house my steps I bend--May blessings still on you at end--Due offerings to the shades to pay.'Thus spoke the king, and turned away:To Janak first he bade adieu,Then followed fast those holy two.The monarch reached his palace whereThe rites were paid with solemn care.When the next sun began to shineHe rose and made his gift of kine.A bundled thousand cows preparedFor each young prince the Bráhmans shared.Each had her horns adorned with gold;And duly was the number told,Four hundred thousand perfect tale:Each brought a calf, each filled a pail.And when that glorious task was o'er,The monarch with his children four,Showed like the Lord of Life divineWhen the worlds' guardians round him shine.
p. 84

Footnotes
83:1 The tenth of the lunar asterisms, composed of five 
stars.
83:2 'There are two lunar asterisms of this name, one following the other immediately, forming the eleventh 
and twelfth of the lunar mansions.
Next: Canto LXXIII.: The Nuptials.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXIII.: THE NUPTIALS.
On that same day that saw the king
His gift of kine distributing,The lord of Kekaya's son, by nameYudhájit, Bharat's uncle, came,Asked of the monarch's health, and thenAddressed the reverend king of men:'The lord of Kekaya's realm by meSends greeting, noble King, to thee:Asks if the friends thy prayers would blessUninterrupted health possess.Right anxious, mighty King, is heMy sister's princely boy to see.For this I sought Ayodhyá fairThe message of my sire to bear.There learning, O my liege, that thouWith sons and noble kinsmen nowWast resting here, I sought the placeLonging to see my nephew's face.'The king with kind observance cheeredHis friend by tender ties endeared,And every choicest honour pressedUpon his honourable guest.
That night with all his children spent,

At morn King Das'aratha went,
Behind Vas'ishtha and the rest,To the fair ground for rites addressed.Then when the lucky hour was nighCalled Victory, of omen high,Came Ráma, after vow and prayerFor nuptial bliss and fortune fair,With the three youths in bright attire,And stood beside his royal sire.To Janak then Vas'ishtha sped,And to Videha's monarch said:'O King, Ayodhyá's ruler nowHas breathed the prayer and vowed the vow,And with his sons expecting standsThe giver of the maidens' hands.The giver and the taker bothMust ratify a mutual oath.Perform the part for which we wait,And rites of marriage celebrate.'
Skilled in the laws which Scriptures teach,
He answered thus Vas'ishtha's speech:'O Saint, what warder bars the gate?Whose bidding can the king await?In one's own house what doubt is shown?This kingdom, Sage, is all thine own.E'en now the maidens may he foundWithin the sacrificial ground:Each vow is vowed and prayed each prayer,

And they, like fire, are shining there.
Here by the shrine my place I tookExpecting thee with eager look.No bar the nuptial rites should stay:What cause have we for more delay?'When Janak's speech the monarch heardTo sons and saints he gave the word,And set them in the holy ring.Then to Vas'ishtha spoke the kingOf Mithilá: 'O mighty Sage,Now let this task thy care engage,And lend thine aid and counsel wiseThe nuptial rites to solemnize.'
The saint Vas'ishtha gave assent,
And quickly to the task he went.With Vis'vámitra, nothing both,And S'atánanda aiding both.Then, as the rules prescribe, they madeAn altar in the midst, and laidFresh wreaths of fragrant flowers thereon.The golden ladles round it shone;And many a vase, which branches hidFixed in the perforated lid,And sprays, and cups, and censers thereStood filled with incense rich and rare;Shell-bowls,and spoons, and salvers dressedWith gifts that greet the honoured guest;Piles of parched rice some dishes bore,

Others with corn prepared ran o'er;
And holy grass was duly spreadIn equal lengths, while prayers were said.Next chief of saints, Vas'ishtha cameAnd laid the offering in the flame.Then by the hand King Janak drewHis Sítá, beautiful to view,And placed her, bright in rich attire,Ráma to face, before the fire,Thus speaking to the royal boyWho filled Kaus'alyá's heart with joy:'Here Sítá stands, my daughter fair,The duties of thy life to share.Take from her father, take thy bride,Join hand to hand, and bliss betide!A faithful wife, most blest is she,And as thy shade will follow thee.'
Thus as he spoke the monarch threw
O'er her young limbs the holy dew,While Gods and saints were heard to swellThe joyous cry, 'Tis well! 'Tis well!His daughter Sítá thus bestowed,O'er whom the sacred drops had flowed.King Janak's heart with rapture glowed.Then to Prince Lakshman thus he cried'.'Take Urmilá thine offered bride,And clasp her hand within thine ownEre yet the lucky hour be flown.'

Then to Prince Bharat thus cried he;
'Come, take the hand of Mándavi.'Then to S'atrughna: 'In thy graspThe hand of S'rutakirti clasp.Now, Raghu's sons, may all of youBe gentle to your wives and true;
p. 85
Keep well the vows you make to-day,Nor let occasion slip away.'
King Janak's word the youths obeyed;
The maidens' hands in theirs they laid.Then with their brides the princes wentWith ordered steps and reverentBound both the tire and Janak, roundThe sages and the sacred ground.
A flowery flood of lucid dyes
In rain descended from the skies,While with celestial voices blent
Sweet strains from many an instrument,
And the nymphs danced in joyous throng
Responsive to the minstrel's song.Such signs of exultation theySaw on the princes' wedding day.
Still rang the heavenly music's sound
When Raghu's sons thrice circled round

The fire, each one with reverent head,
And homeward then their brides they led.They to the sumptuous palace hiedThat Janak's care had seen supplied.The monarch girt with saint and peerStill fondly gazing followed near.
Next: Canto LXXIV.: Ráma With The Axe.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXIV.: RÁMA WITH THE AXE. 1
Soon as the night had reached its close
The hermit Vis'vámitra rose;To both the kings he bade adieuAnd to the northern hill withdrew.Ayodhyá's lord of high renownReceived farewell, and sought his town.Then as each daughter left her bowerKing Janak gave a splendid dower,Bugs, precious silks, a warrior force,Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse,Divine to see and well arrayed;And many a skilful tiring-maid,And many a young and trusty slaveThe father of the ladies gave.Silver and coral, gold and pearlsHe gave to his beloved girls.These precious gifts the king bestowedAnd sped his guest upon his road.The lord of Mithilá's sweet townRode to his court and lighted down.
Ayodhyá's monarch, glad and gay,
Led by the seers pursued his way

With his dear sons of lofty mind:
The royal army marched behind.As on he fared the voice he heardAround of many a dismal bird,And every beast in wild affrightBegan to hurry to the right.The monarch to Vas'ishtha cried:'What strange misfortune will betide?Why do the beasts in terror fly,And birds of evil omen cry?What is it shakes my heart with dread?Why is my soul disquieted?'
Soon as he heard, the mighty saint
Thus answered Das'aratha's plaintIn sweetest tone: 'Now, Monarch, mark,And learn from me the meaning dark.The voices of the birds of airGreat peril to the host declare:The moving beasts the dread allay,So drive thy whelming fear away,'
As he and Das'aratha spoke
A tempest from the welkin broke,That shook the spacious earth amainAnd hurled high trees upon the plain.The sun grew dark with murky cloud,And o'er the skies was cast a shroud,While o'er the army, faint with dread,

A veil of dust and ashes spread.
King, princes, saints their sense retained,Fear-stupefied the rest remained.At length, their wits returning, allBeneath the gloom and ashy pallSaw Jamadagni's son with dread,His long hair twisted round his head,Who, sprung from Bhrigu, loved to beatThe proudest kings beneath his feet.Firm as Kailása's hill he showed,Fierce as the fire of doom he glowed.His axe upon his shoulder lay,His bow was ready for the fray,With thirsty arrows wont to flyLike Lightnings from the angry sky.A long keen arrow forth he drew,Invincible like those which flewFrom S'iva's ever-conquering bowAnd Tripurá in death laid low.
When his wild form, that struck with awe,
Fearful as ravening flame, they saw,Vas'ishtha and the saints whose careWas sacrifice and muttered prayer,Drew close together, each to each,And questioned thus with bated speech:'Indignant at his father's fateWill he on warriors vent his hate,The slayers of his father slay,

And sweep the loathed race away?
But when of old his fury ragedSeas of their blood his wrath assuaged:
p. 86
So doubtless now he has not plannedTo slay all warriors in the land.'
Then with a gift the saints drew near
To Bhrigu's son whose look was fear,And Ráma! Ráma! soft they cried.The gift he took, no word replied.Then Bhrigu's son his silence brokeAnd thus to Ráma Ráma spoke:
Footnotes
85:1 This is another Ráma, son of Jamadagni, called 
Paras'uráma, or Ráma with the axe, from the weapon 
which he carried. He was while he lived the terror ot the Warrior caste, and his name recalls long and fierce struggles between the sacerdotal and military order in which tne latter suffered severely at the hands of their implacable enemy.

Next: Canto LXXV.: The Parle.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXV.: THE PARLE.
'Heroic Ráma, men proclaim
The marvels of thy matchless fame,And I from loud-voiced rumour knowthe exploit of the broken bow,Yea, bent and broken, mighty Chief,A feat most wondrous, past belief.Stirred by thy fame thy face I sought:A peerless bow I too have brought.This mighty weapon, strong and dire,Great Jamadagni owned, my sire.Draw with its shaft my father's bow,And thus thy might, O Ráma, show.This proof of prowess let me see--The weapon bent and drawn by thee;Then single fight our strength shall try,And this shall raise thy glory high.'
King Das'aratha heard with dread
The boastful speech, and thus he said,Raising his hands in suppliant guise,With pallid cheek and timid eyes:'Forgetful of the bloody feudAscetic toils hast thou pursued;Then, Bráhman, let thy children be

Untroubled and from danger free.
Sprung of the race of Bhrigu, whoRead holy lore, to vows most true,Thou swearest to the Thousand-eyedAnd thy fierce axe was cast aside.Thou turnedst to thy rites awayLeaving the earth to Ka•yap's sway,And wentest far a grove to seekBeneath Mahendra's mountain peak. 
1
Now, mighty Hermit, art thou hereTo slay us all with doom severe?For if alone my Ráma fall,We share his fate and perish all.'
As thus the aged sire complained
The mighty chief no answer deigned.To Ráma only thus he cried:'Two bows, the Heavenly Artist's pride,Celestial, peerless, vast, and strong,By all the worlds were honoured long.One to the Three-eyed God 
1b was given,
By glory to the conflict driven,Thus armed fierce Tripura he slew:And then by thee 'twas burst in two.The second bow, which few may brave,The highest Gods to Vishnu gave.This bow I hold; before it fallThe foeman's fenced tower and wall.

Then prayed the Gods the Sire Most High
Bv some unerring proof to tryWere praise for might Lord Vishnu's due,Or his whose Neck is stained with Blue. 
2b
The mighty Sire their wishes knew,And he whose lips are ever trueCaused the two Gods to meet as foes.Then fierce the rage of battle rose:Bristled in dread each starting hairAs S'iva strove with Vishnu there.But Vishnu raised his voice amain.And S'iva's bowstring twanged in vain;Its master of the Three bright EyesStood fixt in fury and surprise.Then all the dwellers in the sky,Minstrel, and saint, and God drew nigh,And prayed them that the strife might cease,And the great rivals met in peace.'Twas seen how S'iva's bow has failedUnnerved, when Vishnu's might assailed,And Gods and heavenly sages thenceTo Vishnu gave preeminence.Then glorious S'iva in his rageGave it to Devarát the sageWho ruled Videha's fertile land,To pass it down from hand to hand.But this my bow, whose shafts smite downThe foeman's fenced tower and town,To great Richika Vishnu lent

To be a pledge and ornament,
Then Jamadagni, Bráhman dread,My sire, the bow inherited.But Arjun stooped to treachery vileAnd slew my noble sire by guile,Whose penance awful strength had gained,Whose hand the God-given bow retained.
p. 87
I heard indignant how he fellBy mournful fate, too sad to tell.My vengeful fury since that timeScourges all Warriors for the crime.As generations spring to lifeI war them down in endless strife.All earth I brought beneath my sway,And gave it for his meed and payTo holy Kas'yap, when of yoreThe rites performed by him were o'er.Then to Mahendra's hill I turnedStrong in the strength that penance earned,And toiled upon his lofty headBy Gods immortal visited.The breaking of the bow I knewFrom startled Gods conversing, throughThe airy regions, of thy deed,And hither came with swiftest speed.Now, for thy Warrior's honour sake,

This best of bows, O Ráma, take:
This, owned by Vishnu's self of old,My sire and grandsire loved to hold.Drawn to its head upon the string,One town-destroying arrow bring;If this thou can, O hero, IIn single fight thy strength will try.'
Footnotes
86:1 'The author of the Raghuvams'a places the 
mountain Mahendra in the territory of the king of the 
Kalingans, whose palace commanded a view of the ocean. It is well known that the country along the coast to the south of the mouths of the Ganges was the seat of this people. Hence it may be suspected that this Mahendra is what Pliny calls "promontorium Calingon". The modern name, Cape Palmyras, from the palmyras Borassus flabelliformis, which abound there agrees remarkably with the description of the poet who speaks of the groves of these trees. Raghuvansa, VI. 51.' SCHLEGEL.
86:1b S'iva
86:2b S'iva. God of the Azure Neck.

Next: Canto LXXVI.: Debarred From Heaven.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXVI.: DEBARRED FROM 
HEAVEN.
The haughty challenge, undeterred
The son of Das'aratha heard,And cried, while reverence for his sireChecked the full torrent of his ire:'Before this day have I been toldThe deed that stained thy hands of old.But pity bids my soul forget:Thy father, murdered, claimed the debt.My strength, O Chief, thou deemest slight,Too feeble for a Warrior's might.Now will I show thy wondering eyesThe prowess which they dare despise.'
He hastened then with graceful ease
Tbat mighty bow and shaft to seize.His hand the weapon strung and swayed:The arrow on the string was laid.Then Jamadagni's son he eyed,And thus in words of fury cried:'Thou art a Bráhman, still to beMost highly honoured, Chief, by me.For Visvámitra's sake beside

Shall reverence due be ne'er denied.
Though mine the power, I would not sendA dart at thee thy life to end.But thy great power to wander free,Which penance-rites have won for thee,Or glorious worlds from thee to wrest,Is the firm purpose of my breast,And Vishnu's dart which now I strainCan ne'er be shot to fall in vain:It strikes the mighty, and it stunsThe madness of the haughty ones.
Then Gods, and saints and heavenly choir
Preceded by the General Sire,Met in the air and gazed belowOn Ráma with that wondrous bow.Nymph, minstrel, angel, all were there,Snake-God, and spirit of the air,Giant, and bard, and gryphon, met,Their eyes upon the marvel set.In senseless hush the world was chainedWhile Ráma's hand the bow retained,And Jamadagni's son amazedAnd powerless on the hero gazed.Then when his swelling heart had shrunk,And his proud strength in torpor sunk,Scarce his voice ventured, low and weak,To Ráma lotus-eyed, to speak:'When long ago I gave away

The whole broad land to Kas'yap's sway
He charged me never to remainWithin the limits of his reign.Obedient to my guide's behestOn earth by night I never rest.My choice is made. I will not dimMine honour and be false to him.So, son of Raghu, leave me stillThe power to wander where I will,And swifter than the thought my flightShall place me on Mahendra's height.My mansions of eternal joy.By penance won, thou mayst destroy.My path to these thy shaft may stay.Now to the work! No more delay!I know thee Lord of Gods; I knowThy changeless might laid Madhu low.All other hands would surely failTo bend this bow. All hail! all hail!See! all the Gods have left the skiesTo bend on thee their eager eyes,With whose achievements none compete.Whose arm in war no God can meet.No shame is mine. I ween, for thou,Lord of the Worlds, hast dimmed my brow.Now, pious Ráma, 'tis thy partTo shoot afar that glorious dart:I, when the fatal shaft is shot,Will seek that hill and tarry not.'

He ceased. The wondrous arrow flew,
And Jamadagni's offspring knewThose glorious worlds to him were barred,Once gained by penance long and hard.Then straight the airy quarters cleared,And the mid regions bright appeared,While Gods and saints unnumbered praisedRáma, the mighty bow who raised.And Jamadagni's son, o'erawed.Extolled his name with highest laud,
p. 88
With reverent steps around him strode,Then hastened on his airy road.Far from the sight of all he fled,And rested on Mahendra's head.
Next: Canto LXXVII.: Bharat's Departure.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXVII.: BHARAT'S DEPARTURE.
Then Ráma with a cheerful mind
The bow to Varun's hand resigned.Due reverence to the saints he paid,And thus addressed his sire dismayed:'As Bhrigu's son is far from view,Now let the host its march pursue,And to Ayodhyá's town proceedIn four-fold bands, with thee to lead.'
King Das'aratha thus addressed
His lips to Ráma's forehead pressed,And held him to his aged breast.Rejoiced in sooth was he to knowThat Bhrigu's son had parted so,And hailed a second life begunFor him and his victorious son.He urged the host to speed renewed,And soon Ayodhyá's gates he viewed.High o'er the roofs gay pennons played;Tabour and drum loud music made;Fresh water cooled the royal road,And flowers in bright profusion glowed.Glad crowds with garlands thronged the waysRejoicing on their king to gaze

And all the town was bright and gay
Exalting in the festive day.People and Bráhmans flocked to meetTheir monarch ere he gained the street.The glorious king amid the throngRode with his glorious sons along,And passed within his dear abodeThat like Himálaya's mountain showed.And there Kausalyá, noble queen,Sumitrá with her lovely mien,Kaikeyí of the dainty waist,And other dames his bowers who graced,Stood in the palace side by sideAnd welcomed home each youthful bride:Fair Sítá, lofty-fated dame,Urmilá of the glorious fame,And Kus'adhwaja's children fair,With joyous greeting and with prayer,As all in linen robes arrayedWith offerings at the altars prayed,Due reverence paid to God above.Each princess gave her soul to love,And hidden in her inmost bowerPassed with her lord each blissful hour.The royal youths, of spirit high,With whom in valor none shall vie,Lived each within his palace boundsBright as Kuvera's pleasure-grounds,With riches, troops of faithful friends,

And bliss that wedded life attends:
Brave princes trained in warlike skill,And duteous to their father's will.At length the monarch called one mornPrince Bharat, of Kaikeyí born,And cried: 'My son, within our gatesLord Yudhájit thine uncle waits.The son of Kekaya's king is he,And came, my child, to summon thee.'
Then Bharat for the road prepared,
And with S'atrughna forth he fared.First to his sire he bade adieu,Brave Ráma, and his mothers too.Lord Yudhájit with joyful prideWent forth, the brothers by his side,And reached the city where he dwelt:And mighty joy his father felt.
Ráma and Lakshman honoured still
Their godlike sire with duteous will.Two constant guides for Ráma stood,His father's wish, the people's good.Attentive to the general wealHe thought and wrought to please and heal,His mothers too he strove to pleaseWith love and sonly courtesies.At every time, in every spot,His holy guides he ne'er forgot.

So for his virtues kind and true
Dearer and dearer Ráma grewTo Das'aratha, Bráhmans, allIn town and country, great and small.And Ráma by his darling's sideSaw many a blissful season glide,Lodged in her soul, each thought on her,Lover, and friend, and worshipper.He loved her for his father's voiceHad given her and approved the choice:He loved her for each charm she woreAnd her sweet virtues more and more.So he her lord and second lifeDwelt in the bosom of his wife,In double form, that, e'en apart,Each heart could commune free with heart.
Still grew that child of Janak's race,
More goddess-fair in form and face,The loveliest wife that e'er was seen,In mortal mould sweet Beauty's Queen.Then shone the son Kaus'alyá bore,   With this bright dame allied,Like Vishnu whom the Gods adore,   With Lakshmi by his side.
Next: Book II

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
p. 89
BOOK II.
Next: Canto I.: The Heir Apparent.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO I.: THE HEIR APPARENT.
So Bharat to his grandsire went
Obedient to the message sent,And for his fond companion choseS'atrughna slayer of his foes.  
1
There Bharat for a time remainedWith love and honour entertained,King As'vapati's constant care,Belovèd as a son and heir.Yet ever, as they lived at ease,While all around combined to pleaseThe agèd sire they left behindWas present to each hero's mind.Nor could the king's fond memory strayFrom his brave children far away,Dear Bharat and S'atrughna dear,Each Varun's match or Indra's peer.   To all the princes, young and brave,His soul with fond affection clave;Around his loving heart they clungLike arms from his own body sprung. 
2
But best and noblest of the four,Good as the God whom all adore,Lord of all virtues, undefiled,

His darling was his eldest child.
For he was beautiful and strong,From envy free, the foe of wrong,With all his father's virtues blest,And peerless in the world confessed.With placid soul he softly spoke:No harsh reply could taunts provoke.He ever loved the good and sageRevered for virtue and for age,And when his martial tasks were o'erSate listening to their peaceful lore.Wise, modest, pure, he honoured eld,His lips from lying tales withheld;Due reference to the Bráhnmans gave,And ruled each passion like a slave.Most tender, prompt at duty's call,Loved by all men he loved them all.Proud of the duties of his race,With spirit meet for Warrior's place,He strove to win by glorious deed,Throned with the Gods, a priceless meed.
With him in speech and quick reply
Vrihaspati might hardly vie,But never would his accents flowFor evil or for empty show.In art and science duly trained,His student vow he well maintained;He learnt the lore for princes fit,

The Vedas and their Holy Writ,
And with his well-drawn bow at lastHis mighty father's fame surpassed.Of birth exalted, truthful, just,With vigorous hand, with noble trust,Well taught by aged twice-born menWho gain and right could clearly ken,Full well the claims and bounds he knewOf duty, gain, and pleasure too:Of memory keen, of ready tact,In civil business prompt to act.Reserved, his features ne'er disclosedWhat counsel in his heart reposed.All idle rage and mirth controlled,He knew the times to give and hold,Firm in his faith, of steadfast will,He sought no wrong, he spoke no ill:Not rashly swift, not idly slow,His faults and others' keen to know.Each merit, by his subtle sense,He matched with proper recompense.He knew the means that wealth provide,And with keen eye expense could guide.Wild elephants could he reclaim,And mettled steeds could mount and tame.No arm like his the bow could wield,Or drive the chariot to the field.Skilled to attack, to deal the blow,Or lead a host against the foe:

Yea, e'en infuriate Gods would fear
To meet his arm in full career.As the great sun in noontide blazeIs glorious with his world of rays.So Ráma with these virtues shoneWhich all men loved to gaze upon.
The agèd monarch fain would rest,
And said within his weary breast,'Oh that I might, while living yet,My Ráma o'er the kingdom set.And see, before my course be run,The hallowed drops anoint my son;See all this spacious land obey,From side to side, my first-born's sway,And then, my life and joy complete,Obtain in heaven a blissful seat!'In him the monarch saw combinedThe fairest form, the noblest mind,And counselled how his son might share,The throne with him as Regent Heir.For fearful signs in earth and sky,And weakness warned him death was nigh:But Ráma to the world endearedBy every grace his bosom cheered,
p. 90
The moon of every eye, whose ray

Drove all his grief and fear away.
So duty urged that hour to seize,Himself, his realm, to bless and please.
From town and country, far and near,
He summoned people, prince, and peer.To each he gave a meet abode,And honoured all and gifts bestowed.Then, splendid in his king's attire,He viewed them, as the general Sire,In glory of a God arrayed,Looks on the creatures he has made.But Kekaya's king he called not thenFor haste, nor Janak, lord of men;For after to each royal friendThe joyful tidings he would send.Mid crowds from distant countries metThe king upon his throne was set;Then honoured by the people, allThe rulers thronged into the hall.On thrones assigned, each king in placeLooked silent on the monarch's face.   Then girt by lords of high renown   And throngs from hamlet and from town     He showed in regal pride,As, honoured by the radiant bandOf blessed Gods that round him stand,Lord Indra, Thousand-eyed.

Footnotes
89:1 S'atrughna means slayer of foes, and the word is 
repeated as an intensive epithet.
89:2 Alluding to the images of Vishnu, which have four arms, the four princes being portions of the substance of 
that God.
Next: Canto II.: The People's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO II.: THE PEOPLE'S SPEECH.
Then to the full assembly bowed
The monarch, and addressed the crowdWith gracious speech, in accents loudAs heavenly drum or thunder-cloud:
'Needs not to you who know declare
How ever with paternal careMy fathers of Ikshváku's lineHave ruled the realm which now is mine.I too have taught my feet to treadThe pathway of the mighty dead,And with fond care that never sleptHave, as I could, my people kept.So toiling still, and ne'er remissFor all my people's weal and bliss,Beneath the white umbrella's  
1 shade.
Old age is come and strength decayed.Thousands of years have o'er me flown,And generations round me grownAnd passed away. I crave at lengthRepose and ease for broken strength.Feeble and worn I scarce can bearThe ruler's toil, the judge's care,

With royal dignity, a weight
That tries the young and temperate.
I long to rest, my labour done,
And in my place to set my son,If to the twice-born gathered hereMy counsel wise and good appear.For greater gifts than mine adornRáma my son, my eldest-born.Like Indra brave, before him fallThe foeman's cities, tower and wall.Him prince of men for power and might,The best maintainer of the right,Fair as the moon when nothing barsHis glory close to Pushya's stars,Him with to-morrow's light I fainWould throne the consort of my reign,A worthy lord for you, I ween,Marked as her own by Fortune's Queen.The triple world itself would beWell ruled by such a king as he.To such high bliss and happy fateWill I the country dedicate,And my sad heart will cease to grieveIf he the precious charge receive.Thus is my careful plan matured,Thus for myself is rest secured;Lieges, approve the words I say,Or point ye out some wiser way.

Devise your prudent plan. My mind
Is fondly to this thought inclined,But men by keen debating moveSome middle course which all approve.'
The monarch ceased. In answer came
The joyous princes' glad acclaim.So peacocks in the rain rejoiceAnd hail the cloud with lifted voice.Murmurs of joy from thousands roundShook the high palace with the sound.Then when the gathered throng had learnedHis will who right and gain discerned,Peasant and townsman, priest and chief,All met in consultation brief,And soon agreed with one accordGave answer to their sovereign lord:'King of the land, we know thee old:Thousands of years have o'er thee rolled,Ráma thy son, we pray, anoint.And at thy side his place appointOur gallant prince, so brave and strong,Riding in royal state along,Our eyes with joyful pride will seeScreened by the shade that shelters thee.'Then spake the king again, as thoughTheir hearts' true wish he sought to know:'These prayers for Ráma's rule suggestOne question to my doubting breast.

This thing, I pray, with truth explain:
Why would ye, while I justly reign,That he, mine eldest son, should bearHis part with me as ruling heir?'Then all the people made reply,Peasant and townsman, low and high:' Each noblest gift of form and mind,
p. 91
O Monarch, in thy son we find.Do thou the godlike virtues hearWhich Ráma to our hearts endear.So richly blest with graces, noneIn all the earth excels thy son:Nay, who to match with him may claimIn truth, in justice, and in fame?True to his promise, gentle, kind,Unenvious, of grateful mind,Versed in the law and firm of soul,He keeps each sense with strict control.With duteous care he loves to sitBy Bráhmans skilled in Holy Writ.Hence brightest glory, ne'er to end,And matchless fame his youth attend.Skilled in the use of spear and shield.And arms which heavenly warriors wield,Supreme in war, unconquered yetBv man, fiend, God in battle met,

Whene'er in pomp of war he goes
'Gainst town or city of the foes,He ever comes with Lakshman backVictorious from the fierce attack.Returning homeward from afarBorne on his elephant or car,He ever to the townsmen bendsAnd greets them as beloved friends,Asks how each son, each servant thrives,How fare our pupils, offerings, wives;And like a father bids us tell,Each for himself, that all is well.If pain or grief the city triesHis heart is swift to sympathize.When festive scenes our thoughts employHe like a father shares the joy.High is the fate, O King, that gaveThy Ráma born to bless and save,With filial virtues fair and mildLike Kas'yap old Maríchi's child.Hence to the kingdom's distant endsOne general prayer for him ascends.Each man in town and country praysFor Ráma's strength, health, length of days.With hearts sincere, their wish the same,The tender girl, the aged dame,Subject and stranger, peasant, hind,One thought impressed on every mind,At evening and at dawning day

To all the Gods for Ráma pray.
Do thou, O King, of grace comply,And hear the people's longing cry,And let us on the throne by theeThe lotus-tinted Ráma see.   O thou who givest boons, attend;   A gracious ear, O Monarch, lend     And for our weal install,Consenting to our earnest prayer,Thy godlike Ráma Regent Heir,     Who seeks the good of all.'
        * * * * 
Footnotes
90:1 Chief of the insignia of imperial dignity.
Next: Canto III.: Das'aratha's Precepts.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO III.: DAS'ARATHA'S PRECEPTS.
The monarch with the prayer complied
Of suppliant hands, on every sideUplifted like a lotus-bed:And then these gracious words he said:'Great joy and mighty fame are mineBecause your loving hearts incline,In full assembly clearly shownTo place my Ráma on the throne.'Then to Vas'ishtha, standing near,And Vámadeva loud and clearThe monarch spoke that all might hear:''Tis pure and lovely Chaitra nowWhen flowers are sweet on every bough;All needful things with haste prepareThat Ráma be appointed heir.'
Then burst the people's rapture out
In loud acclaim and joyful shout;And when the tumult slowly ceasedThe king addressed the holy priest:'Give order, Saint, with watchful heedFor what the coming rite will need.This day let all things ready waitMine eldest son to consecrate.'

Best of all men of second birth
Vas'ishtha heard the lord of earth,And gave commandment to the bandsOf servitors with lifted handsWho waited on their master's eye:'Now by to-morrow's dawn supplyRich gold and herbs and gems of priceAnd offerings for the sacrifice,Wreaths of white flowers and roasted rice.And oil and honey, separate;New garments and a car of state,An elephant with lucky signs,A fourfold host in ordered lines,The white umbrella, and a pairOf chowries,  
1 and a banner fair;
A hundred vases, row on row,To shine like fire in splendid glow,A tiger's mighty skin, a bullWith gilded horns most beautiful.All these, at dawn of coming day,Around the royal shrine array,Where burns the fire's undying ray.Each palace door, each city gateWith wreaths of sandal decorate.And with the garlands' fragrant scentLet clouds of incense-smoke be blent.Let food of noble kind and tasteBe for a hundred thousand placed;Fresh curds with streams of milk bedewed

To feed the Bráhman multitude.
p. 92
With care be all their wants supplied.
And mid the twice-born chiefs divideRich largess, with the early morn,And oil and curds and roasted corn.Soon as the sun has shown his lightPronounce the prayer to bless the rite,And then be all the Bráhmans calledAnd in their ordered seats installed.Let all musicians skilled to play,And dancing-girls in bright arrayStand ready in the second ringWithin the palace of the king.Each honoured tree, each holy shrineWith leaves and flowery wreaths entwine,And here and there beneath the shadeBe food prepared and presents laid.Then brightly clad, in warlike guise,With long swords girt upon their thighs,Let soldiers of the nobler sortMarch to the monarch's splendid court.'
Thus gave command the twice-born pair
To active servants stationed there.Then hastened to the king and saidThat all their task was duly sped,

The king to wise Sumantra spake:
'Now quick, my lord, thy chariot take,And hither with thy swiftest speedMy son, my noble Ráma lead.'
Sumantra, ere the word was given,
His chariot from the court had driven,And Ráma, best of all who rideIn cars, came sitting by his side.The lords of men had hastened forthFrom east and west and south and north,Áryan and stranger, those who dwellIn the wild wood and on the fell,And as the Gods to Indra, theyShowed honour to the king that day.
Like Vásav, when his glorious form
Is circled by the Gods of storm,Girt in his hall by kings he sawHis car-borne Ráma near him draw,Like him who rules the minstrel bandOf heaven;  
1 whose valour tilled the land,
Of mighty arm and stately prideLike a wild elephant in stride,As fair in face as that fair stoneDear to the moon, of moonbeams grown,  
2
With noble gifts and grace that tookThe hearts of all, and chained each look,World-cheering as the Lord of Rain

When floods relieve the parching plain.
The father, as the son came nigh,Gazed with an ever-thirstier eye.Sumantra helped the prince alight
From the good chariot passing bright,
And as to meet his sire he wentFollowed behind him reverent.Then Ráma clomb, the king to seekThat terrace like Kailása's peak,And reached the presence of the king,Sumantra closely following.Before his father's face he came,Raised suppliant hands and named his name,  
1b
And bowing lowly as is meetPaid reverence to the monarch's feet.But soon as Das'aratha viewedThe prince in humble attitude,He raised him by the hand in hasteAnd his beloved son embraced,Then signed him to a glorious throne,Gem-decked and golden, near his own.Then Ráma, best of Raghu's line,Made the fair seat with lustre shineAs when the orient sun upspringsAnd his pure beam on Meru flings.The glory flashed on roof and wall,And with strange sheen suffused the hall,As when the moon's pure rays are sent

Through autumn's star-lit firmament.
Then swelled his breast with joy and prideAs his dear son the father eyed,E'en as himeself more fair arrayedIn some clear mirror's face displayed.The aged monarch gazed awhile,Then thus addressed him with a smile,As Kas'yap, whom the worlds revere,Speaks for the Lord of Gods to hear:'O thou of all my sons most dear,In virtue best, thy father's peer,Child of my consort first in place,Mine equal in her pride of race,Because the people's hearts are boundTo thee by graces in thee found,Be thou in Pushya's favouring hourMade partner of my royal power.I know that thou by nature's bentBoth modest art and excellent,But though thy gifts no counsel needMy love suggests the friendly rede.Mine own dear son, be modest still,And rule each sense with earnest will.Keep thou the evils far awayThat spring from love and anger's sway.Thy noble course alike pursueIn secret as in open view,And every nerve, the love to gainOf ministers and subjects, strain.

The happy prince who sees with pride
His thriving people satisfied;Whose arsenals with arms are stored,And treasury with golden hoard,--
p. 93
His friends rejoice as joyed the BlestWhen Amrit crowned their eager quest.So well, my child, thy course maintain,And from all ill thy soul refrain.'
The friends of Ráma, gathered nigh,
Longing their lord to gratify,Ran to Kaus'alyá's bower to tellThe tidings that would please her well.She, host of dames, with many a gem,And gold, and kine rewarded them.
Then Ráma paid the reverence due,
Mounted the chariot, and withdrew,And to his splendid dwelling droveWhile crowds to show him honour strove.   The people, when the monarch's speech     Their willing ears had heard,   Were wild with joy as though on each     Great gifts had been conferred.   With meek and low salute each man     Turned to his home away,

   And there with happy heart began
     To all the Gods to pray.
Footnotes
91:1 Whisks, usually made of the long tails of the Yak.
92:1 Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.
92:2 The Chandrakánta or Moonstone, a sort of crystal 
supposed to be composed of congealed moonbeams.
92:1b A customary mark of respect to a superior.
Next: Canto IV.: Ráma Summoned.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IV.: RÁMA SUMMONED.
The crowd dismissed, to high debate
The monarch called his peers of state,And, counsel from their lips obtained,Firm in his will his will explained:'To-morrow with auspicious rayThe moon in Pushya's sign will stay;Be that the time with happy fateMine eldest son to consecrate,And let my Ráma, lotus-eyed,As Regent o'er the state preside.'
He sought, within, his charioteer,
And cried 'Again bring Ráma here.'To Ráma's home Sumantra hiedAgain to be the prince's guide.His coming, told to Ráma's ear,Suggested anxious doubt and fear.He bade the messenger be ledThat instant in, and thus he said:'Tell me the cause, omitting naught.Why thou again my house hast sought.'
The envoy answered: 'Prince, thy sire

Has sent thy presence to require.
My sender known,'tis thine to sayIf thou wilt go or answer nay.'Then Ráma, when he heard his speech,Made haste the royal court to reach.Soon as the monarch was awareHis dearest son was waiting there,Eager the parley to beginHe bade them lead the prince within,Soon as he passed the chamber doorThe hero bent him to the floor,And at a distance from his seatRaised his joined hands his sire to greet.The monarch raised him from the ground,And loving arms about him wound,Then pointed to a seat that shoneWith gold for him to rest upon.'Aged am I,' he said, 'and worn;In life's best joys my share have borne;Rites to the Gods, in hundreds, paid,With gifts of corn and largess made.I yearned for sons: my life is blestWith them and thee of sons the best.No debt to saints or Bráhmans, no,Nor spirits, Gods, or self I owe.One duty now remains alone,To set thee on thy father's throne.Now therefore, Ráma, hear my rede,And mark my words with duteous heed:

This day the peoples' general voice,
Elects thee king of love and choice,And I, consenting to the prayer,Will make thee, darling, Regent Heir.Dread visions, each returning night,With evil omens scare my sight.Red meteors with a fearful soundShoot wildly downward to the ground,While tempests lash the troubled air;And they who read the stars declareThat, leagued against my natal sign,Ráhu 
1 the Sun, 2 and Mars combine.
When portents dire as these appear,A monarch's death or woe is near.Then while my senses yet are spared,And thought and will are unimpaired,Be thou, my son, anointed king:Men's fancy is a fickle thing.To-day the moon, in order due,Entered the sign Punarvasu; 
3
To-morrow, as the wise foretell,In Pushya's favouring stars will dwell:Then on the throne shalt thou be placed.My soul, prophetic, counsels haste:Thee, O my son, to-morrow IAs Regent Heir will sanctify.So till the coming night he passedDo thou and Sítá strictly fast:From worldly thoughts thy soul refrain,

And couched on holy grass remain.
p. 94
And let thy trusted lords attend
In careful watch upon their friend,For, unexpected, check and barOur weightiest counsels often mar.While Bharat too is far awayMaking with royal kin his stay,I deem the fittest time of allThee, chosen Regent, to install.It may be Bharat still has stoodTrue to the counsels of the good,Faithful to thee with tender trust,With governed senses, pure and just.But human minds, too well I know,Will sudden changes undergo,And by their constant deeds aloneThe virtue of the good is shown.Now, Ráma, go. My son, good night!Fixt is to-morrow for the rite.'
Then Ráma paid the reverence due,
And quickly to his home withdrew.He passed within, nor lingered there,But sought his mother's mansion, whereThe dame in linen robes arrayedDevoutly in the chapel prayed

To Fortune's Queen,with utterance checked,
That she her Ráma would protect.There was Sumitrá too, and thereWas Lakshman led by loving care:And when the royal choice they knewSítá in haste was summoned too.Absorbed, with half-shut eyes, the queenAttended by the three was seen.She knew that Pushya's lucky hourWould raise her son to royal power,So fixed with bated breath each thoughtOn God supreme, by all men sought.To her, as thus she knelt and prayed,Ráma drew near, due reverence paid,And then to swell his mother's joy,Thus spoke her own beloved boy;'O mother dear, my sire's decreeEntrusts the people's weal to me.To-morrow I, for so his will.Anointed king, the throne shall fill.The few last hours till night shall endSitá with me must fasting spend,For so my father has decreed,And holy priests with him agreed.What vows soever thou mayst deemMy consecration's eve beseem,Do thou, sweet mother, for my sakeAnd for beloved Sitá's make.'

When the glad news Kaus'alyá heard,
So long desired, so long deferred,While tears of joy her utterance broke,In answer to her son she spoke:'Long be thy life, my darling: nowThy prostrate foes before thee bow.Live long and with thy bright successMy friends and dear Sumitrá's bless.Surely the stars were wondrous fairWhen thee, sweet son, thy mother bare,That thy good gifts such love inspireAnd win the favour of thy sire.With thee I travailed not in vain;Those lotus eyes reward my pain,And all the glory of the lineOf old Ikshváku will be thine.'
He smiled, and on his brother gazed
Who sate with reverent hands upraised,And said: 'My brother, thou must beJoint-ruler of this land with me.My second self thou, Lakshman, art,And in my fortune bearest part.Be thine, Sumitrá's son, to knowThe joys from regal power that flow.My life itself, the monarch's seat,For thy dear sake to me are sweet. 
1
Thus Ráma to his brother said,

To both his mothers' bowed his head,
And then with Sítá by his sideTo his own house the hero hied.
Footnotes
93:1 Ráhu, the ascending node, is in mythology a 
demon with the tail of a dragon whose head was severed 
from his body by Vishnu, but being immortal, the head and tail retained their separate existence and being transferred to the stellar sphere became the authors of eclipses; the first especially by endeavouring to swallow the sun and moon.
93:2 In eclipse.
93:3 The seventh of the lunar asterisms.
Next: Canto V.: Ráma's Fast.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO V.: RÁMA'S FAST.
Then Saint Vas'ishtha to the king
Came ready at his summoning.'Now go,' exclaimed the monarch, 'thouEnriched by fervent rite and vow,For Ráma and his wife ordainThe fast, that joy may bless his reign.'
The best of those who Scripture know
Said to the king, 'My lord, I go.'To Ráma's house Vas'ishtha hied,The hero's fast by rule to guide,And skilled in sacred texts to tellEach step to him instructed well.Straight to Prince Ráma's high abode,That like a cloud pale-tinted showed,Borne in his priestly car he rode.Two courts he passed, and in the thirdHe stayed his car. Then Ráma heardThe holy sage was come, and flewTo honour him with honour due.He hastened to the car and lentHis hand to aid the priest's descent.Then spoke Vas'ishtha words like these,Pleased with his reverent courtesies,

With pleasant things his heart to cheer
Who best deserved glad news to hear:'Prince, thou hast won thy father's grace,And thine will be the Regent's place:Now with thy Sítá, as is right,In strictest fasting spend the night,
p. 95
For when the morrow's dawn is fairThe king will consecrate his heir:So Nahush, 
1 as the wise relate,
Yayáti joyed to consecrate.'
Thus having said, Vas'ishtha next
Ordained the fast by rule and text,For Ráma faithful to his vowsAnd the Videhan dame his spouse.Then from the prince's house he hiedWith courteous honours gratified.Round Ráma gathered every friendIn pleasant talk a while to spend.He bade good night to all at last,And to his inner chamber passed.Then Ráma's house shone bright and gayWith men and maids in glad array,As in the morning some fair lakeWhen all her lotuses awake,And every bird that loves the flood

Flits joyous round each opening bud.
Forth from the house Vas'ishtha drove,
That with the king's in splendour strove,And all the royal street he viewedFilled with a mighty multitudeThe eager concourse blocked each square,Each road and lane and thoroughfare,And joyous shouts on every sideRose like the roar of Ocean's tide,As streams of men together cameWith loud huzza and glad acclaim.The ways were watered, swept and clean,And decked with flowers and garlands greenAnd all Ayodhyá shone arrayedWith banners on the roofs that played.Men, women, boys with eager eyes,Expecting when the sun should rise,Stood longing for the herald rayOf Ráma's consecration day,To see, a source of joy to all,The people-*honoured festival.
The priest advancing slowly through
The mighty crowd he cleft in two,Near to the monarch's palace drew.He sought the terrace, by the stair,Like a white cloud peak high in air,The reverend king of men to meet

Who sate upon his splendid seat:
Thus will Vrihaspati ariseTo meet the monarch of the skies.But when the king his coming knew,He left his throne and near him drewQuestioned by him Vas'ishtha saidThat all his task was duly sped.Then all who sate there, honouringVas'ishtha, rose as rose the king,Vas'ishtha bade his lord adieu,And all the peers, dismissed, withdrew.
Then as a royal lion seeks
His cave beneath the rocky peaks,So to the chambers where abodeHis consorts Das'aratha strode.   Full-thronged were those delightful bowers     With women richly dressed,   And splendid as the radiant towers     Where Indra loves to rest.   Then brighter flashed a thousand eyes     With the light his presence lent,   As, when the moon begins to rise     The star thronged firmament.
Footnotes

94:1 Kaus'alyá aud Sumitrá.
95:1 A king of the Lunar race, and father of Yayáti.
Next: Canto VI.: The City Decorated.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VI.: THE CITY DECORATED.
Then Ráma bathed in order due,
His mind from worldly thoughts withdrew,And with big large-eyed wife besoughtNáráyan, as a votary ought.Upon his head the brimming cupOf holy oil he lifted up,Then placed within the kindled fireThe offering to that heavenly Sire,And as he sipped the remnant prayedTo Him for blessing and for aid.Then with still lips and tranquil mindWith his Videhan he reclined,In Vishnu's chapel, on a bedWhere holy grass was duly spread,While still the prince's every thoughtTbe God supreme, Náráyan, sought.One watch remained the night to closeWhen Ráma from his couch arose,And bade the men and maids adornHis palace for the solemn morn.He heard the bards and heralds raiseAuspicious strains of joy and praise;And breathed devout, with voice restrained,The hymn for morning rites ordained;

Then, with his head in reverence bowed,
Praised Madhu's conquering foe aloud.And, in pure linen robes arrayed,The priests to raise their voices prayed.Obedient to the summons theyProclaimed to all the festal day.The Bráhmans' voices, deep and sweet,Resounded through the crowded street,And echoed through Ayodhyá wentBy many a loud-toned instrument.Then all the people joyed to hearThat Ráma with his consort dearHad fasted till the morning lightIn preparation for the rite.Swiftly the joyful tidings throughAyodhyá's crowded city flew,And soon as dawn appeared, each manTo decorate the town began.
p. 96
In all the temples bright and fairAs white clouds towering in the air,In streets, and where the cross-ways met,Where holy fig-trees had been set,In open square, in sacred shade,Where merchants' shops their wealth displayed,On all the mansions of the great,And householders of wealth and state,

Where'er the people loved to meet,
Where'er a tree adorned the street,Gay banners floated to the wind,And ribands round the staves were twined.Then clear the singers' voices rang,As, charming mind and ear, they sang.Here players shone in bright attire,There dancing women swelled the quire.Each with his friend had much to sayOf Ráma's consecration-day:Yea, even children, as they playedAt cottage doors beneath the shade.The royal street with flowers was strownWhich loving hands in heaps had thrown,And here and there rich incense lentIts fragrance to the garland's scent;And all was fresh and fair and brightIn honour of the coming rite.With careful foresight to illumeWith borrowed blaze the midnight gloom,The crowds erected here and thereTrees in each street gay lamps to bear.The city thus from side to sideIn festal guise was beautified.The people of the town who longedTo view the rite together thronged,And filling every court and squarePraised the good king in converse there:'Our high-souled king! He throws a grace

On old Ikshváku's royal race.
He feels his years' increasing weight,And makes his son associate.Great joy to us the choice will bringOf Ráma for our lord and king.The good and bad to him are known,And long will he protect his own.No pride his prudent breast may swell,Most just, he loves his brothers well,And to us all that love extends,Cherished as brothers and as friends.Long may our lord in life remain,Good Das'aratha, free from stain,By whose most gracious favour weRáma anointed king shall see.'
Such were the words the townsmen spoke
Heard by the gathering countryfolk,Who from the south, north, east, and west,Stirred by the joyful tidings, pressed.For by their eager longing ledTo Ráma's consecration spedThe villagers from every side,And filled Ayodhyá's city wide.This way and that way strayed the crowd,While rose a murmur long and loud,As when the full moon floods the skiesAnd Ocean's waves with thunder rise.   That town, like Indra's city fair,

     While peasants thronged her ways.
   Tumultuous roared like Ocean, where     Each flood-born monster plays.
Next: Canto VII.: Manthará's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VII.: MANTHARÁ'S LAMENT.
It chanced a slave-born handmaid, bred
With Queen Kaikeyí, fancy-fed,Mounted the stair and stood uponThe terrace like the moon that shone.Thence Manthará at ease surveyedAyodhyá to her eyes displayed,Where water cooled the royal street,Where heaps of flowers were fresh and sweet,And costly flags and pennons hungOn roof and tower their shadow flung;With covered ways prepared in haste,And many an awning newly placed;With sandal-scented streams bedewed,Thronged by a new bathed multitude:Whose streets were full of Bráhman bandsWith wreaths and sweetmeats in their hands.Loud instruments their music raised,And through the town, where'er she gazed,The doors of temples glittered white,And the maid marvelled at the sight.
Of Ráma's nurse who, standing by,
Gazed with a joy-expanded eye,In robes of purest white attired,

The wondering damsel thus inquired:
'Does Ráma's mother give away
Rich largess to the crowds to-day,On some dear object fondly bent,Or blest with measureless content?What mean these signs of rare delightOn every side that meet my sight?Say, will the king with joy elateSome happy triumph celebrate?'
The nurse, with transport uncontrolled,
Her glad tale to the hump-back told:'Our lord the king to-morrow mornWill consecrate his eldest-born,And raise, in Pushya's favouring hour,Prince Ráma to the royal power.'As thus the nurse her tidings spoke,Rage in the hump-back's breast awoke.Down from the terrace, like the headOf high Kailása's hill, she sped.Sin in her thoughts, her soul aflame,Where Queen Kaikeyí slept, she came:
p. 97
'Why sleepest thou?' she cried, 'arise,Peril is near, unclose thine eyes.Ah, heedless Queen, too blind to know

Wnat floods of sin above thee flow!
Thy boasts of love and grace are o'er:Thine is the show and nothing more.His favour is an empty cheat,A torrent dried by summer's heat.'
Thus by the artful maid addressed
In cruel words from raging breast,The queen, sore troubled, spoke in turn;'What evil news have I to learn?That mournful eye, that altered cheekOf sudden woe or danger speak.'
Such were the words Kaikeyí said:
Then Manthará, her eyeballs redWith fury, skilled with treacherous artTo grieve yet more her lady's heart,From Ráma, in her wicked hate,Kaikeyí's love to alienate,Upon her evil purpose bentBegan again most eloquent:'Peril awaits thee swift and sure,And utter woe defying cure;King Das'aratha will createPrince Ráma Heir Associate.Plunged in the depths of wild despair,My soul a prey to pain and care,As though the flames consumed me, zealHas brought me for my lady's weal,

Thy grief, my Queen, is grief to me:
Thy gain my greatest gain would be.Proud daughter of a princely line,The rights of consort queen are thine.How art thou, born of royal race,Blind to the crimes that kings debase!Thy lord is gracious, to deceive,And flatters, but thy soul to grieve,While thy pure heart that thinks no sinKnows not the snares that hem thee in.Thy husband's lips on thee bestowSoft soothing word, an empty show:The wealth, the substance, and the powerThis day will be Kaus'alyá's dower.With crafty soul thy child he sendsTo dwell among thy distant friends,And, every rival far from sight,To Ráma gives the power and might.Ah me! for thou, unhappy dame,Deluded by a husband's name,With more than mother's love hast pressedA serpent to thy heedless breast,And cherished him who works thee woe,No husband but a deadly foe.For like a snake, unconscious Queen,Or enemy who stabs unseen,King Das'aratha all untrueHas dealt with thee and Bharat too.Ah, simple lady, long beguiled

By his soft words who falsely smiled!
Poor victim of the guileless breast,A happier fate thou meritest.For thee and thine destruction waitsWhen he Prince Ráma consecrates.Up, lady, while there yet is time;Preserve thyself, prevent the crime.Up, from thy careless ease, and freeThyself, O Queen, thy son, and me!'
Delighted at the words she said,
Kaikeyí lifted from the bed,Like autumn's moon, her radiant head,And joyous at the tidings gaveA jewel to the hump-back slave;And as she gave the precious toyShe cried in her exceeding joy:'Take this, dear maiden, for thy newsMost grateful to mine ear, and chooseWhat grace beside most fitly mayThe welcome messenger repay.I joy that Ráma gains the throne:Kaus'alyá's son is as mine own.'
Next: Canto VIII: Manthará's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VIII: MANTHARÁ'S SPEECH.
The damsel's breast with fury burned:
She answered, as the gift she spurned:'What time, O simple Queen, is thisFor idle dreams of fancied bliss?Hast thou not sense thy state to know,Engulfed in seas of whelming woe;Sick as I am with grief and painMy lips can scarce a laugh restrainTo see thee hail with ill-timed joyA peril mighty to destroy.I mourn for one so fondly blind:What woman of a prudent mindWould welcome, e'en as thou hast done,The lordship of a rival's son,Rejoiced to find her secret foeEmpowered, like death, to launch the blow;I see that Ráma still must fearThy Bharat, to his throne too near.Hence is my heart disquieted,For those who fear are those we dread.Lakshman, the mighty bow who draws,With all his soul serves Ráma's cause;And chains as strong to Bharat bindS'atrughna, with his heart and mind,

Now next to Ráma, lady fair,
Thy Bharat is the lawful heir:And far remote, I ween, the chanceThat might the younger two advance.Yes, Queen,'tis Ráma that I dread,Wise, prompt, in warlike science bred;And oh, I tremble when I thinkOf thy dear child on ruin's brink.
p. 98
Blest witn a lofty fate is she,Kaus'alyá; for her son will bePlaced, when the moon and Pushya meet,By Bráhmans on the royal seat,Thou as a slave in suppliant guiseMust wait upon Kaus'alyá's eyes,With all her wealth and bliss securedAnd glorious from her foes assured.Her slave with us who serve thee, thouWilt see thy son to Ráma bow,And Sítá's friends exult o'er all,While Bharat's wife shares Bharat's fall.'
As thus the maid in wrath complained,
Kaikeyí saw her heart was pained,And answered eager in defenceOf Ramá's worth and excellence:'Nay, Ráma, born the monarch's heir,

By holy fathers trained with care,
Virtuous, grateful, pure, and true,Claims royal sway as rightly due.He, like a sire, will long defendEach brother, minister, and friend.Then why, O hump-back, art thou painedTo hear that he the throne has gained?Be sure when Ráma's empire ends,The kingdom to my son descends,Who, when a hundred years are flown,Shall sit upon his fathers' throne.Why is thine heart thus sad to seeThe joy that is and long shall be,This fortune by possession sureAnd hopes which we may count secure?Dear as the darling son I boreIs Ráma, yea, or even more.Most duteous to Kaus'alyá, heIs yet more dutiful to me.What though he rule, we need not fear:His brethren to his soul are dear.And if the throne Prince Ráma fillBharat will share the empire still.'
She ceased. The troubled damsel sighed
Sighs long and hot, and thus replied:'What madness has possessed thy mind,To warnings deaf, to dangers blind?Canst thou not see the floods of woe

That threaten o'er thine head to flow:
First Ráma will the throne acquire,Then Ráma's son succeed his sire,While Bharat will neglected pineExcluded from the royal line.Not all his sons, O lady fair,The kingdom of a monarch share:All ruling when a sovereign diesWild tumult in the state would rise.The eldest, be he good or ill,Is ruler by the father's will.Know, tender mother, that thy sonWithout a friend and all undone.Far from the joyous ease of homeAn alien from his race will roam.I sped to thee for whom I feel,But thy fond heart mistakes my zeal,Thy hand a present would bestowBecause thy rival triumphs so.When Ráma once begins his swayWithout a foe his will to stay,Thy darling Bharat he will driveTo distant lands if left alive.By thee the child was sent awayBeneath his grandsire's roof to stay.Even in stocks and stones perforceWill friendship spring from intercourse.The young S'atrughna too would goWith Bharat, for he loved him so.

As Lakshman still to Ráma cleaves,
He his dear Bharat never leaves.There is an ancient tale they tell:A tree the foresters would fellWas saved by reeds that round it stood,For love that sprang of neighbourhood.So Lakshman Ráma will defend,And each on each for aid depend.Such fame on earth their friendship winsAs that which binds the Heavenly Twins.And Ráma ne'er will purpose wrongTo Lakshman, for their love is strong.But Bharat, Oh, of this be sure,Must evil at his hands endure.Come, Ráma from his home expelAn exile in the woods to dwell.The plan, O Queen, which I adviseSecures thy weal if thou be wise,So we and all thy kith and kinAdvantage from thy gain shall win.Shall Bharat, meet for happier fate,Born to endure his rival's hate,With all his fortune ruined cowerAnd dread his brother's mightier power!Up, Queen, to save thy son, arise;Prostrate at Ráma's feet he lies.So the proud elephant who leadsHis trooping consorts through the reedsFalls in the forest shade beneath

The lion's spring and murderous teeth.
Scorned by thee in thy bliss and prideKaus'alyá was of old defied,And will she now forbear to showThe vengeful rancour of a foe?   O Queen, thy darling is undone   When Ráma's hand has once begun     Ayodhyá's realm to sway,   Come, win the kingdom for thy child   And drive the alien to the wild     In banishment to-day.'
Next: Canto IX.: The Plot.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IX.: THE PLOT.
As fury lit Kaikeyí's eyes
She spoke with long and burning sighs:
p. 99
'This day my son enthroned shall see,And Ráma to the woods shall flee.But tell me, damsel, if thou can,A certain way, a skilful planThat Bharat may the empire gain,And Ráma's hopes be nursed in vain.'
The lady ceased. The wicked maid
The mandate of her queen obeyed,And darkly plotting Ráma's fallResponded to Kaikeyí's call.
'I will declare, do thou attend,
How Bharat may his throne ascend.Dost thou forget what things befell?Or dost thou feign, remembering well?Or wouldst thou hear my tongue repeatA story for thy need so meet?

Gay lady, if thy will be so,
Now hear the tale of long ago,And when my tongue has done its partPonder the story in thine heart.When Gods and demons fought of old,Thy lord, with royal saints enrolled,Sued to the war with thee to bringHis might to aid the Immortals' King.Far to the southern land he spedWhere Dandak's mighty wilds are spread,To Vaijayanta's city swayedBy S'ambara, whose flag displaydThe hugest monster of the sea.Lord of a hundred wiles was be;With might which Gods could never blameAgainst the King of Heaven he came.Then raged the battle wild and dread,And mortal warriors fought and bled;The fiends by night with strength renewedCharged, slew the sleeping multitude.Thy lord, King Das'aratha, longStood fighting with the demon throng,But long of arm, unmatched in strength,Fell wounded by their darts at length.Thy husband, senseless, by thine aidWas from the battle field conveyed.And wounded nigh to death thy lordWas by thy care to health restored.Well pleased the grateful monarch sware

To grant thy first and second prayer.
Thou for no favour then wouldst sue,The gifts reserved for season due;And he, thy high-souled lord, agreedTo give the boons when thou shouldst need.Myself I knew not what befell,But oft the tale have heard thee tell,And close to thee in friendship knitDeep in my heart have treasured it.Remind thy husband of his oath,Recall the boons and claim them both,That Bharat on the throne be placedWith rites of consecration graced,And Ráma to the woods be sentFor twice seven years of banishment.Go, Queen, the mourner's chamber  
1 seek,
With angry eye and burning cheek;And with disordered robes and hairOn the cold earth lie prostrate there.When the king comes still mournful lie,Speak not a word nor meet his eye,But let thy tears in torrent flow,And lie enamoured of thy woe.Well do I know thou long hast been,And ever art, his darling queen.For thy dear sake, O well-loved dame,The mighty king would brave the flame,But ne'er would anger thee, or brookTo meet his favourite's wrathful look.

Thy loving lord would even die
Thy fancy, Queen, to gratify,And never could he arm his breastTo answer nay to thy request.Listen and learn, O dull of sense,Thine all-resistless influence.Gems he will offer, pearls and gold:Refuse his gifts, be stern and cold.Those proffered boons at length recall,And claim them till he grants thee all.And O my lady, high in bliss,With heedful thought forget not this.When from the ground his queen he liftsAnd grants again the promised gifts,Bind him with oaths he cannot breakAnd thy demands unflnching, make.That Ráma travel to the wildFive years and nine from home exiled,And Bharat, best of all who reign.The empire of the land obtain.For when this term of years has fledOver the banished Ráma's head,Thy royal son to vigour grownAnd rooted firm will stand alone.The king, I know, is well inclined,And this the hour to move his mind.Be bold: the threatened rite prevent,And force the king from his intent.'

She ceased. So counselled to her bane
Disguised beneath a show of gain,Kaikeyí in her joy and prideTo Manthará again replied:'Thy sense I envy, prudent maid;With sagest lore thy lids persuade.No hump-back maid in all the earth,For wise resolve, can match thy worth.Thou art alone with constant zealDevoted to thy lady's weal.Dear girl, without thy faithful aidI had not marked the plot he laid.
p. 100
Full of all guile and sin and spiteMisshapen hump-backs shock the sight:But thou art fair and formed to please,Bent like a lily by the breeze.I look thee o'er with watchful eye,And in thy frame no fault can spy;The chest so deep, the waist so trim,So round the lines of breast and limb. 
1
Thy cheeks with moonlike beauty shine,And the warm wealth of youth is thine.Thy legs, my girl, are long and neat,And somewhat long thy dainty feet,While stepping out before my faceThou seemest like a crane to pace.

The thousand wiles are in thy breast
Which Sambara the fiend possessed,And countless others all thine own,O damsel sage, to thee are known.Thy very hump becomes thee too,O thou whose face is fair to view,For there reside in endless storePlots, wissard wiles, and warrior lore.A golden chain I'll round it flingWhen Ráma's flight makes Bharat king:Yea, polished links of finest gold,When once the wished for prize I holdWith naught to fear and none to hate,Thy hump, dear maid, shall decorate.A golden frontlet wrought with care,And precious jewels shalt thou wear:Two lovely robes around thee fold,And walk a Goddess to behold,Bidding the moon himself compareHis beauty with a face so fair.With scent of precious sandal sweetDown to the nails upon thy feet,First of the household thou shalt goAnd pay with scorn each battled foe.'   Kaikeyi's praise the damnel heard,And thus again her lady stirred,Who lay upon her beauteous bedLike fire upon the altar fed:'Dear Queen, they build the bridge in vain

When swollen streams are dry again.
Arise, thy glorious task complete,And draw the king to thy retreat.'   The large-eyed lady left her bowerExulting in her pride of power,And with the hump-back sought the gloomAnd silence of the mourner's room.The string of priceless pearls that huugAround her neck to earth she flung,With all the wealth and lustre lentBy precious gem and ornament.Then, listening to her slave's advice,Lay, like a nymph from Paradise.
As on the ground her limbs she laid
Once more she cried unto the maid:'Soon must thou to the monarch sayKaikeyi's soul has past away,Or, Ráma banished as we planned,My son made king shall rule the land.No more for gold and gems I care,For brave attire or dainty fare.If Ráma should the throne ascend,That very hour my life will end.'
   The royal lady wounded through
The bosom with the darts that flew   Launched from the hump-back's tonguePressed both her hands upon her side,

And o'er and o'er again she cried
   With wildering fury stung:'Yes, it shall be thy task to tellThat I have hurried hence to dwell   In Yama's realms of woe,Or happy Bharat shall be king,And doomed to years of wandering   Kaus'alyá's son shall go.I heed not dainty viands nowFair wreaths of flowers to twine my brow,   Soft balm or precious scent:My very life I count as naught,Nothing on earth can claim my thought   But Ráma's banishment.'   She spoke these words of cruel ire;Then stripping off her gay attire,   The cold bare floor she pressed.So, falling from her home on high,Some lovely daughter of the sky   Upon the ground might rest.With darkened brow and furious mien,Stripped of her gems and wreath, the queen   In spotless beauty lay,Like heaven obscured with gathering cloud,When shades of midnight darkness shroud   Each star's expiring ray.

Footnotes
99:1 Literally the chamber of wrath, a 'growlery,' a 
small, dark, unfurnished room to which it seems, the 
wives and ladies of the king betook themselves when offended and sulky.
100:1 In these four lines I do not translate faithfully, 
and I do not venture to follow Kaikeyi farther in her 
eulogy of the hump- back's charms.
Next: Canto X.: Das'aratha's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO X.: DAS'ARATHA'S SPEECH.
As Queen Kaikeví thus obeyed
The sinful counsel of her maidShe sank upon the chamber floor,As sinks in anguish, wounded sore,An elephant beneath the smartOf the wild hunter's venomed dart.The lovely lady in her mindResolved the plot her maid designed,And prompt the gain and risk to scanShe step by step approved the plan.Misguided by the hump back's guileShe pondered her resolve awhile,As the fair path that bliss securedThe miserable lady lured,
p. 101
Devoted to her queen, and swayedBy hopes of gain and bliss, the maidRejoiced her lady's purpose known,And deemed the prize she sought her own.Then bent upon her purpose dire,Kaikeyí with her soul on fire,Upon the floor lay, languid, down,

Her brows contracted in a frown.
The bright-hued wreath that bound her hair,Chains, necklets, jewels rich and rare,Stripped off by her own fingers laySpread on the ground in disarray,And to the floor a lustre lentAs stars light up the firmament.Thus prostrate in the mourner's cell,In garb of woe the lady fell,Her long hair in a single braid,Like some fair nymph of heaven dismayed.  
1
   The monarch, Ráma to install,With thoughtful care had ordered all,And now within his home withdrew,Dismissing first his retinue.Now all the town has heard, thought he,What joyful rite the morn will see.So turned he to her bower to cheerWith the glad news his darling's ear.Majestic, as the Lord of Night,When threatened by the Dragon's might,Bursts radiant on the evening skyPale with the clouds that wander by,So Das'aratha, great in fame,To Queen Kaikeyí's palace came.There parrots flew from tree to tree,And gorgeous peacocks wandered free,While ever and anon was heardThe note of some glad water-bird.

Here loitered dwarf and hump-backed maid,
There lute and here sweet music played.Here, rich in blossom, creepers twinedO'er grots with wondrous art designed,There Champac and As'oka flowersHung glorious o'er the summer bowers,And mid the waving verdure roseGold, silver, ivory porticoes.Through all the months in ceaseless storeThe trees both fruit and blossom bore.With many a lake the grounds were graced;Seats gold and silver, here were placed;Here every viand wooed the taste,It was a garden meet to vieE'en with the home of Gods on high.
Within the mansion rich and vast
The mighty Das'aratha passed:Not there was his beloved queenOn her fair couch reclining seen.With love his eager pulses beatFor the dear wife he came to meet,And in his blissful hopes deceived,He sought his absent love and grieved.For never had she missed the hourOf meeting in her sumptuous bower,And never had the king of menEntered the empty room till then.Still urged by love and anxious thought

News of his favourite queen he sought,
For never had his loving eyesFound her or selfish or unwise.Then spoke at length the warder maid,With hands upraised and sore afraid:'My Lord and King, the queen has soughtThe mourner's cell with rage distraught.'   The words the warder maiden saidHe heard with soul disquieted,And thus as fiercer grief assailed,His troubled senses wellnigh failed.Consumed by torturing fires of griefThe king, the world's imperial chief,His lady lying on the groundIn most unqueenly posture, found.The aged king, all pure within,Saw the young queen resolved on sin,Low on the ground, his own sweet wife,To him far dearer than his life,Like some fair creeping plant uptorn,Or like a maid of heaven forlorn,A nymph of air or Goddess sentFrom Swarga down in banishment.As some wild elephant who triesTo soothe his consort as she liesStruck by the hunter's venomed dart,So the great king disturbed in heart.Strove with soft hand and fond caressTo soothe his darling queen's distress,

Aud in his love addressed with sighs
The lady of the lotus eyes:   'I know not, Queen, why thou shouldst beThus angered to the heart with me.Say, who has alighted thee, or whenceHas come the cause of such offenceThat in the dust thou liest low,And rendest my fond heart with woe,As if some goblin of the nightHad struck thee with a deadly blight,And cast foul influence on herWhose spells my loving bosom stir?I have Physicians famed for skill,Each trained to cure some special ill:My sweetest lady, tell thy pain,And they shall make thee well again.Whom, darling, wouldst thou punished see?Or whom enriched with lordly fee?
p. 102
"Weep not, my lovely Queen, and stayThis grief that wears thy frame awaySpeak, and the guilty shall be freed,The guiltless be condemned to bleed.The poor enriched, the rich abased.The low set high, the proud disgraced.Mv lords and I thy will obey,All slaves who own thy sovereign sway;

And I can ne'er my heart incline
To check in aught one wish of thine.Now by my life I pray thee tellThe thoughts that in thy bosom dwell,The power and might thou knowest wel.Should from thy breast all doubt expel,I swear by all my merit won,Speak, and thy pleasure shall be done.Far as the world's wide bounds extendMy glorious empire knows no end.Mine are the tribes in eastern lands,And those who dwell on Sindhu's sands:Mine is Suráshtra, far away,Suvíra's realm admits my sway.My best the southern nations fear,The Angas and the Vaugas hear.And as lord paramount I reignO'er Magadh and the Matsyas' plain,Kos'al, and Kási's wide domain: 
1
All rich in treasures of the mine.In golden corn, sheep, goats, and kine.Choose what thou wilt. Kaikeyi, thence:But tell me, O my darling, whenceArose thy grief, and it shall flyLike hoar-frost when the sun is high.'
She, by his loving words consoled,
Longed her dire purpose to unfold,And sought with sharper pangs to wring

The bosom of her lord the king.
Footnotes
101:1 These verses are evidently an interpolation. They 
contain nothing that has not been already related: the 
words only are altered. As the whole poem could not be recited at once, the rhapsodists at the beginning of a fresh recitation would naturally remind their hearers of the events immediately preceding.
Next: Canto XI.: The Queen's Demand.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XI.: THE QUEEN'S DEMAND.
To him enthralled by love, and blind,
Pierced by his darts who shake the mind, 2
Kaikeyi with remorseless breastHer grand purpose thus expressed:
"O King, no insult or neglectHave I endured, or disrespect.One wish I have, and faith would soeThat longing granted, laid, by thee.Now pledge thy word if thou incline
To listen to this prayer of mine,
Then I with confidence will speak,And thou shalt hear the boon I seek.'
Ere she had ceased, the monarch fell,
A victim to the lady's spell,And to the deadly snare she setSprang, like a roebuck to the net.Her lover raised her drooping head,Smiled, playing with her hair, and said:'Hast thou not learnt, wild dame, till now

That there is none so dear as thou'
To me thy loving husband, saveMy Rama bravest of the brave!By him my race's high-souled heir,By him whom none can match, I swear,Now speak the wish that on thee weighs:By him whose right is length of days,Whom if my fond paternal eyeSaw not one hour I needs must die,--I swear by Rama myd ear son,Speak, and thy bidding shall be done.Speak, darling; if thou choose, requestTo have the heart from out my breast;Regard my words, sweet love, and nameThe wish thy mind thinks fit to frame.Nor let shy soul give way to doubt:My power should drive suspicion out.Yea, by my merits won I swear,Speak, darling, I will grant thy prayer,'
The queen, ambitious, overjoyed
To see him by her plot decoyed.More eager still her aims to reach,Spoke her abominable speech:'A boon thou grantest, nothing loth,And swearest with repeated oath.Now let the thirty Gods and threeMy witnesses, with Indra, be.Let sun and moon and planets hear,

Heaven, quarters, day and night, give ear.
The mighty world, the earth outspread,With birds of heaven and demons regard;The ghosts that walk in midnight shade,And household Gods, our present aid,A every being great and smallTo hear and mark the oath I call.'
When this the archer king was bound,
With treacherous arts and oaths unwound,She to her beauteous lord subdued,By blinding love, her speech renewed:'Rememer, King, that long-past dayOf Gods' and demons' battle fray.And how thy foe in doubtful strifeHad nigh bereft thee of thy life.Remember, it was only IPreserved thee when about to die,And thou for watchful love and careWouldst grant my first aud second prayer.Those offered boons, pledged with thee then,I now demand, O King of men,
p. 103
Of thee, O Monarch, good and just,Whose righteous soul observes each trust.If thou refuse thy promise sworn,I die, despised, before the morn.

These rites in Ráma's name begun
Transfer them, and enthrone my son.The time is come to claim at lastThe double boon of days long-past,When Gods and demons met in fight.And thou wouldst fain my care requite.Now forth to Dandak's forest driveThy Ráma for nine years and five,And let him dwell a hermit thereWith deerskin coat and matted hair.Without a rival let my boyThe empire of the land enjoy,And let mine eyes ere morning seeThy Ráma to the forest flee.'
Footnotes
102:1 The Sloka or distich which I have been forced to 
expand into these nine lines is evidently spurious, but is 
found in all the commented MSS. whioh Schiegel consulted.
102:2 Maumatha, Mind-disturber, a name of Kama or 
Love.

Next: Canto XII.: Dasaratha's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XII.: DASARATHA'S LAMENT.
The monarch, as Kaikeyi pressed
With cruel words her dire request,Stood for a time absorbed in thoughtWhile anguish in his bosom wrought.Does some wild dream my heart assail!Or do my troubled senses fail!Does some dire portent scare my view?Or frenzy's stroke my soul subdue?'Thus as he thought, his troubled mindIn doubt and dread no rest could find,Distressed and trembling like a deerWho sees the dreaded tigress near.On the bare ground his limbs he thres,And many a long sigh he drew,Like a wild snake, with fury blind,By charms within a ring confined.Once as the monarch's fury woke,'Shame on thee!' from his bosom broke,And then in sense-bewildering painHe fainted on the ground again.At length, when slowly strength returned,He answered as his eyeballs burnedWith the wild fury of his ireConsuming her, as 'twere, with fire:

'Fell traitress, thou whose thought design
The utter ruin of my line,What wrong have I or Ráma done?Speak murderess, speak thou wicked one,Seeks he not evermore to pleaseThee with all sonlike courtesies?By what persuasion art thou ledTo bring this ruin on his head?Ah me, that fondly unawareI brought thee home my life to snare,Called daughter of a king, in truthA serpent with a venomed tooth!What fault can I pretend to findIn Ráma praised by all mankind,That I my darling should forsake?No, take my life, my glory take:Let either queen be from me torn,But not my well-loved eldest-born,Him but to see is highest bliss,And death itself his face to miss.The world may sunless stand, the grainMay thrive without the genial rain,But if my Ráma be no nighMy spirit from its frame will fly.Enough, thine impious plan forgo,O thou who plottest sin and woe.My head before my feet, I kneel,And pray thee some compassion feel,O wicked dame, what can have led

Thy heart to dare a plot so dread?
Perchance thy purpose is to soundThe grace thy son with me has found;Perchance the words that, all these days,Thou hast said in Ráma's praise,Were only feigned; designed to cheerWith flatteries a father's ear.Soon as thy grief, my Queen, I knew,My bosom felt the anguish too.In empty halls art thou posessed,And subject to anothers' hest?Now on Ikshváku's ancient raceFalls foul disorder and disgrace,If thou, O Queen, whose heart so longHas loved the good should choose the wrongNot once, O large-eyed dame, hast thouBeen guilty of offence till now,Nor said a word to make me grieve,Nor will I now thy sin believe.With thee my Ráma used to holdLike place with Bharat lofty-souled.As thou so ofthe, when the pairWere children yet, wouldst fain declare.And can thy righteous soul endureThat Ráma glorious, pious, pure,Should to the distant wilds be sentFor fourteen years of banishment?Yea, Ráma Bharat's self exceedsIn love to thee and sonlike deeds,

And, for deserving love of thee,
As Bharat, even so is he.Who better than that chieftain mayObedience, love, and honour pay,They dignity with care protect,Thy slightest word and wish respect?Of all his countless followers noneCan breathe a word against my son;Of many thousands not a dameCan hint reproach or whisper blame.All creatures feel the sweet controlOf Ráma's pure and gentle soul.The pride of Manu's race he bindsTo him the people's grateful minds.He wins the subjects with his truth,
p. 104
The poor with gifts and gentle ruth,His teachers with his docile will,The foemen with his archer skill.Truth, purity, religious zeal,The hand to give, the heart to feel.The love that ne'er betrays a friend,The rectitude that naught can bend,Knowledge, and meek obedience graceMy Ráma pride of Raghu's race.Canst thou thine impious plot design'Gainst him in whom these virtues shine,

Whose glory with the sages vies,
Peer of the Gods who rule the skies!From him no harsh or bitter wordTo pain one creature have I heard,And how can I my sin address,For thee, with words of bitterness?Have mercy, Queen: some pity showTo see my tears of anguish now,And listen to my mournful cry,A poor old man who soon must die.Whate'er this sea-girt land can boastOf rich and rare from coast to coast,To thee, my Queen, I give it all:But O, thy deadly words recall:O see, my suppliant hands entreat,Again my lips are on thy feet:Save Ráma, save my darling child,Nor kill me with this sin defiled.'He grovelled on the ground, and layTo burning grief a senseless prey,And ever and anon, assailedBy floods of woe he wept and wailed,Striving with eager speed to gainThe margent of his sea of pain.
With fiercer words she fiercer yet
The hapless father's pleading met:'O Monarch, if thy soul repentThe promise and thy free consent,

How wilt thou in the world maintain
Thy fame for truth unsmirched with stain?When gathered kings with thee converse,And bid thee all the tale rehearse.What wilt thou say, O truthful King,In answer to their questioning?'She to whose love my life I owe,Who saved me smitten by the foe,Kaikeyí, for her tender care,Was cheated of the oath I sware. 
1
Thus wilt thou answer, and forswornWilt draw on thee the princes' scorn.Learn from that tale, the 'Hawk and Dove,'How strong for truth was Saivya's love.Pledged by his word the monarch gaveHis flesh the suppliant bird to save.So King Alarka gave his eyes,And gained a mansion in the skies.
The Sea himself his promise keeps,
And ne'er beyond his limit sweeps.My deeds of old again recall,Nor let thy bond dishonoured fall.The rights of truth thou wouldst forgetThy Ráma on the throne to set,And let thy days in pleasure glide,Fond King, Kaus'alyá by thy side.Now call it by what name thou wilt,Justice, injustice, virtue, guilt,

Thy word and oath remain the same,
And thou must yield what thus I claim.If Ráma be anointed, IThis very day will surely die,Before thy face will poison drink,And lifeless at thy feet will sink.Yea, better far to die than stayAlive to see one single dayThe crowds before Kaus'alyá standAnd hail her queen with reverent hand.Now by my son, myself, I swear,No gift, no promise whatsoe'erMy steadfast soul shall now content,But only Ráma's banishment.'
So far she spake by rage impelled,
And then the queen deep silence held.He heard her speech full fraught with ill,But spoke no word bewildered still,Gazed on his love once held so dearWho spoke unlovely rede to hear;Then as he slowly pondered o'erThe queen's resolve and oath she swore.Once sighing forth, Ah Ráma! heFell prone as falls a smitten tree.His senses lost like one insane,Faint as a sick man weak with pain,Or like a wounded snake dismayed,So lay the king whom earth obeyed.

Long burning sighs he slowly heaved,
As, conquered by his woe, he grieved,And thus with tears and sobs betweenHis sad faint words addressed the queen:
'By whom, Kaikeyí, wast thou taught
This flattering hope with ruin fraught?Have goblins seized thy soul, O dame,Who thus canst speak and feel no shame?Thy mind with sin is sicklied o'er,From thy first youth ne'er seen before.A good and loving wife wast thou,But all, alas! is altered now.What terror can have seized thy breastTo make thee frame this dire request,That Bharat o'er the land may reign,And Ráma in the woods remain?Turn from thine evil ways, O turn,And thy perfidious counsel spurn,If thou would fain a favour doTo people, lord, and Bharat too.O wicked traitress, fierce and vile,Who lovest deeds of sin and guile,
p. 105
What crime or grievance dost thou see,What fault in Ráma or in me?Thy son will ne'er the throne accept

If Ráma from his rights be kept,
For Bharat's heart more firmly yetThan Ráma's is on justice set.How shall I say, Go forth, and brookUpon my Ráma's face to look,See his pale cheek and ashy lipsDimmed like the moon in sad eclipse?How see the plan so well preparedWhen prudent friends my counsels shared,All ruined, like a host laid lowBeneath some foeman's murderous blow?What will these gathered princes say,From regions near and far away?'O'erlong endures the monarch's reign,For now he is a child again.'When many a good and holy sageIn Scripture versed, revered for age,Shall ask for Ráma, what shall IUnhappy, what shall I reply?'By Queen Kaikeyí long distressedI drove him forth and dispossessed.'Although herein the truth I speak,They all will hold me false and weak.What will Kaus'alyá say when sheDemands her son exiled by me?Alas! what answer shall I frame,Or how console the injured dame?She like a slave on me attends,And with a sister's care she blends

A mother's love, a wife's, a friend's.
In spite of all her tender care,Her noble son, her face most fair,Another queen I could preferAnd for thy sake neglected her,But now, O Queen, my heart is grievedFor love and care by thee received,E'en as the sickening wretch repentsHis dainty meal and condiments.And how will Queen Sumitrá trustThe husband whom she finds unjust,Seeing my Ráma driven henceDishonoured, and for no offence?Ah! the, Videhan bride will hearA double woe, a double fear,Two whelming sorrows at one breath,Her lord's disgrace, his father's death.Mine aged bosom she will wringAnd kill me with her sorrowing,Sad as a fair nymph left to weepDeserted on Himálaya's steep.For short will be my days, I ween,When I with mournful eyes have seenMy Ráma wandering forth aloneAnd heard dear Sítá sob and moan.Ah me! my fond belief I rue.Vile traitress, loved as good and true,As one who in his thirst has quaffed,Deceived by looks, a deadly draught.

Ah! thou hast slain me, murderess, while
Soothing my soul with words of guile,As the wild hunter kills the deerLured from the brake his song to hear.Soon every honest tongue will flingReproach on the dishonest king;The people's scorn in every streetThe seller of his child will meet,And such dishonour will be mineAs whelms a Bráhman drunk with wine.Ah me, for my unhappy fate,Compelled thy words to tolerate!Such woe is sent to scourge a crimeCommitted in some distant time.For many a day with sinful careI cherished thee, thou sin and snare,Kept thee, unwitting, like a cordDestined to bind its hapless lord.Mine hours of ease I spent with thee,Nor deemed my love my death would be,While like a heedless child I played,On a black snake my hand I laid.A cry from every mouth will burstAnd all the world will hold me curst,Because I saw my high-souled sonUnkinged, unfathered, and undone;'The king by power of love beguiledIs weaker than a foolish child,His own beloved son to make

An exile for a woman's sake.
By chaste and holy vows restrained,By reverend teachers duly trained.When he his virtue's fruit should tasteHe falls by sin and woe disgraced.'Two words will all his answer beWhen I pronounce the stern decree,'Hence, Ráma, to the woods away,'All he will say is, I obey.O, if he would my will withstandWhen banished from his home and land.This were a comfort in my woe;But he will ne'er do this, I know.My Ráma to the forest fled,And curses thick upon my head,Grim Death will bear me hence away,His world-abominated prey.When I am gone and Ráma too.How wilt thou those I love pursue?What vengeful sin will be designedAgainst the queens I leave behind?When thou hast slain her son and meKaus'alyá soon will follow: sheWill sink beneath her sorrows' weight,And die like me disconsolate,Exist, Kaikeyí, in thy pride,And let thy heart be gratified,When thou my queens and me hast hurled,And children, to the under world.

Soon wilt thou rule as empress o'er
My noble house unvext before.But then to wild confusion left,
p. 106
Of Ráma and of me bereft.If Bharat to thy plan consentAnd long for Ráma's banishment,Ne'er let his hands presume to payThe funeral honours to my clayVile foe, thou cause of all mine ill,Obtain at last thy cursed will.A widow soon shalt thou enjoyThe sweets of empire with thy boy.O Princess, sure some evil fateFirst brought thee here to devastate,In whom the night of ruin liesVeiled in a consort's fair disguise.The scorn of all and deepest shameWill long pursue my hated name,And dire disgrace on me will press,Misled by thee to wickedness.How shall my Ráma, whom, before,His elephant or chariot bore,Now with his feet, a wanderer, treadThe forest wilds around him spread?How shall my son, to please whose taste,The deftest cooks, with earrings graced,

With rivalry and jealous care
The dainty meal and cates prepare--How shall he now his life sustainWith acid fruit and woodland grain?He spends his time unvext by cares,And robes of precious texture wears:How shall he, with one garment roundHis limbs recline upon the ground?Whose was this plan, this cruel thoughtUnheard till now, with ruin fraught,To make thy son Ayodhyá's king,And send my Ráma wandering?Shame, shame on women! Vile, untrue,Their selfish ends they still pursue.Not all of womankind I mean.But more than all this wicked queen.   O worthless, cruel, selfish dame,     I brought thee home, my plague and woe.   What fault in me hast thou to blame,     Or in my son who loves thee so?   Fond wives may from their husbands flee,     And fathers may their sons desert,   But all the world would rave to see     My Ráma touched with deadly hurt.   I joy his very step to hear,     As though his godlike form I viewed;   And when I see my Ráma near     I feel my youth again renewed.   There might be life without the sun,

     Yea, e'en if Indra sent no rain,
   But, were my Ráma banished, none     Would, so I think, alive remain.   A foe that longs my life to take,     I brought thee here my death to be,   Caressed thee long, a venomed snake,     And through my folly die, Ah me!   Ráma and me and Lakshman slay,     And then with Bharat rule the state;   So bring the kingdom to decay,     And fawn on those thy lord who hate,   Plotter of woe, for evil bred,     For such a speech why do not all   Thy teeth from out thy wicked head     Split in a thousand pieces fall?   My Ráma's words are ever kind,     He knows not how to speak in ire:   Then how canst thou presume to find     A fault in him whom all admire?   Yield to despair, go mad, or die,     Or sink within the rifted earth;   Thy fell request will I deny,     Thou shamer of thy royal birth.   Thy longer life I scarce can bear,     Thou ruin of my home and race,   Who wouldst my heart and heartstrings tear,     Keen as a razor, false and base.   My life is gone, why speak of joy?     For what, without my son, were sweet?

   Spare, lady, him thou canst destroy;
     I pray thee as I touch thy feet.'   He fell and wept with wild complaint.     Heart-struck by her presumptuous speech,   But could not touch, so weak and faint,     The cruel feet he strove to reach.
Footnotes
104:1 This story is told in the Mahábhárat. A free 
version of it may be found in Scenes from the Rámáyan, 
etc.
Next: Canto XIII.: Das'aratha's Distress.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIII.: DAS'ARATHA'S DISTRESS.
Unworthy of his mournful fate,
The mighty king, unfortunate,Lay prostrate in unseemly guise,As, banished from the blissful skies,Yayáti, in his evil day.His merit all exhausted, lay.  
1
The queen, triumphant in the powerWon by her beauty's fatal dower,Still terrible and unsubdued,Her dire demand again renewed:'Great Monarch,'twas thy boast till nowTo love the truth and keep the vow;Then wherefore would thy lips refuseThe promised boon 'tis mine to choose?'   King Das'aratha, thus addressed,With anger raging in his breast,Sank for a while beneath the pain,Then to Kaikeyí spoke again:
p. 107
'Childless so long, at length I won,With mighty toil, from Heaven a son,Ráma, the mighty-armed; and how

Shall I desert my darling now?
A scholar wise, a hero bold,Of patient mood, with wrath controlled,How can I bid my Ráma fly,My darling of the lotus eye?In heaven itself I scarce could bear,When asking of my Ráma there,To hear the Gods his griefs declare,And O, that death would take me henceBefore I wrong his innocence!'
As thus the monarch wept and wailed,
And maddening grief his heart assailed,The sun had sought his resting-place,And night was closing round apace.But yet the moon-crowned night could bringNo comfort to the wretched king.As still he mourned with burning sighsAnd fixed his gaze upon the skies:'O Night whom starry fires adorn,I long not for the coming morn.Be kind and show some mercy: see,My suppliant hands are raised to thee.Nay, rather fly with swifter pace;No longer would I see the faceOf Queen Kaikeyí, cruel, dread,Who brings this woe upon mine head.'Again with suppliant hands he triedTo move the queen, and wept and sighed:

'To me, unhappy me, inclined
To good, sweet dame, thou shouldst be kind;Whose life is well-nigh fled, who clingTo thee for succour, me thy king.This, only this, is all my claim:Have mercy, O my lovely dame.None else have I to take my part.Have mercy: thou art good at heart.Hear, lady of the soft black eye.And win a name that ne'er shall die:Let Ráma rule this glorious land,The gift of thine imperial hand.O lady of the dainty waist,With eyes and lips of beauty graced,Please Ráma, me, each saintly priest,Bharat, and all from chief to least.'
   She heard his wild and mournful cry,
     She saw the tears his speech that broke,   Saw her good husband's reddened eye,       But, cruel still, no word she spoke.   His eyes upon her face he bent,     And sought for mercy, but in vain:   She claimed his darling's banishment,     He swooned upon the ground again.
Footnotes

106:1 Only the highest merit obtains a home in heaven 
for ever. Minor degrees of merit procure only leases of 
heavenly mansions terminable after periods proportioned to the fund which buys them. King Yayáti went to heaven and when his term expired was unceremoniously ejected, and thrown down to earth.
Next: Canto XIV.: Ráma Summoned.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIV.: RÁMA SUMMONED.
The wicked queen her speech renewed,
When rolling on the earth she viewedIkshváku's son, Ayodhyá's king,For his dear Ráma sorrowing:'Why, by a simple promise bound,Liest thou prostrate on the ground,As though a grievous sin dismayedThy spirit! Why so sore afraid?Keep still thy word. The righteous deemThat truth, mid duties, is supreme:And now in truth and honour's nameI bid thee own the binding claim.S'aivya, a king whom earth obeyed,Onoe to a hawk a promise made,Gave to the bird his flesh and bone,And by his truth made heaven his own.  
1
Alarka, when a Bráhman famedFor Scripture lore his promise claimed,Tore from his head his bleeding eyesAnd unreluctant gave the prize.His narrow bounds prescribed restrainThe Rivers' Lord, the mighty main,Who, though his waters boil and rave,Keeps faithful to the word he gave.

Truth all religion comprehends,
Through all the world its might extends:In truth alone is justice placed,On truth the words of God are based;A life in truth unchanging pastWill bring the highest bliss at lastIf thou the right would still pursue,Be constant to thy word and true:Let me thy promise fruitful see,For boons, O King, proceed from thee.Now to preserve thy righteous fame,And yielding to my earnest claim--Thrice I repeat it--send thy child,Thy Ráma, to the forest wild.But if the boon thou still deny,Before thy face, forlorn, I die.'
Thus was the helpless monarch stung
By Queen Kaikeyí's fearless tongue,As Bali strove in vain to looseHis limbs from Indra's fatal noose.Dismayed in soul and pale with fear,The monarch, like a trembling steerBetween the chariot's wheel and yoke,Again to Queen Kaikeyí spoke,With sad eyes fixt in vacant stare,Gathering courage from despair:'That hand I took, thou sinful dame,With texts, before the sacred flame,

Thee and thy son, I scorn and hate,
And all at once repudiate.
p. 108
The night is fled: the dawn is near:Soon will the holy priests be hereTo bid me for the rite prepareThat with my son the tnrone will share,The preparation made to graceMy Ráma in his royal place--With this, e'en this, my darling forMy death the funeral flood shall pour.Thou and thy son at least forbearIn offerings to my shade to share,For by the plot thy guile has laidHis consecration will be stayed.This very day how shall I brookTo meet each subject's altered look?To mark each gloomy joyless browThat was so bright and glad but now?'
While thus the high-souled monarch spoke
To the stern queen, the Morning broke,And holy night had slowly fled,With moon and stars engarlanded.Yet once again the cruel queenSpoke words in answer fierce and keen,Still on her evil purpose bent,

Wild with her rage and eloquent:
'What speech is this? Such words as theseSeem sprung from poison-sown disease.Quick to thy noble Ráma sendAnd bid him on his sire attend.When to my son the rule is given;When Ráma to the woods is driven;When not a rival copes with me,From chains of duty thou art free.'
Thus goaded, like a generous steed
Urged by sharp spurs to double speed,'My senses are astray,' he cried,'And duty's bonds my hands have tied.I long to see mine eldest son,My virtuous, my beloved one.'
And now the night had past away;
Out shone the Maker of the Day,Bringing the planetary hourAnd moment of auspicious power.Vas'ishtha, virtuous, far renowned,Whose young disciples girt him round,With sacred things without delayThrough the fair city took his way.He traversed, where the people thronged.And all for Ráma's coming longed,The town as fair in festive showAs his who lays proud cities low.  
1

He reached the palace where he heard
The mingled notes of many a bird,Where crowded thick high-honoured bandsOf guards with truncheons in their hands.Begirt by many a sage, elate,Vas'ishtha reached the royal gate,
And standing by the door he found
Sumantra, for his form renowned,The king's illustrious charioteerAnd noble counsellor and peer.To him well skilled in every partOf his hereditary artVas'ishtha said: 'O charioteer,Inform the king that I am here,Here ready by my side beholdThese sacred vessels made of gold,Which water for the rite containFrom Gangá and each distant main.Here for installing I have broughtThe seat prescribed of fig-wood wrought,All kinds of seed and precious scentAnd many a gem and ornament;Grain, sacred grass, the garden's spoil,Honey and curds and milk and oil;Eight radiant maids, the best of allWar elephants that feed in stall;A four-horse car, a bow and sword.A litter, men to bear their lord;

A white umbrella bright and fair
That with the moon may well compare;Two chouries of the whitest hair;A golden beaker rich and rare;A bull high-humped and fair to view,Girt with gold bands and white of hue;A four-toothed steed with flowing mane,A throne which lions carved sustain;A tiger's skin, the sacred fire,Fresh kindled, which the rites require;The best musicians skilled to play,And dancing-girls in raiment gay;Kine, Bráhmans, teachers fill the court,And bird and beast of purest sort.From town and village, far and near,The noblest men are gathered here;Here merchants with their followers crowd,And men in joyful converse loud,And kings from many a distant landTo view the consecration stand.The dawn is come, the lucky day;Go bid the monarch haste away,That now Prince Ráma may obtainThe empire, and begin his reign.'
Soon as he heard the high behest
The driver of the chariot pressedWithin the chambers of the king,His lord with praises honouring.

And none of all the warders checked
His entrance for their great respectOf him well known, in place so high,Still fain their king to gratify.He stood beside the royal chief,Unwitting of his deadly grief,And with sweet words began to singThe praises of his lord and king:'As, when the sun begins to rise,The sparkling sea delights our eyes,Wake, calm with gentle soul, and thus
p. 109
Give rapture, mighty King, to us.As Mátali  
1 this selfsame hour
Sang lauds of old to Indra's power,When he the Titan hosts o'erthrew,So hymn I thee with praises due.The Vedas, with their kindred lore,Brahma their soul-born Lord adore,With all the doctrines of the wise,And bid him, as I bid thee, rise.As, with the moon, the Lord of DayWakes with the splendour of his rayProlific Earth, who neath him lies,So, mighty King, I bid thee rise.With blissful words, O Lord of men,Rise, radiant in thy form, as when

The sun ascending darts his light
From Meru's everlasting height.May Œiva, Agni, Sun, and MoonBestow on thee each choicest boon,Kuvera, Varun, Indra blessKakutstha's son with all success.Awake, the holy night is fled,The happy light abroad is spread;Awake, O best of kings, and shareThe glorious task that claims thy care.The holy sage Vaœishtha waits,With all his Bráhmans, at the gateGive thy decree, without delay,To consecrate thy son today.As armies, by no captain led,As flocks that feed unshepherded,Such is the fortune of a stateWithout a king and desolate.'   Such were the words the bard addressed,With weight of sage advice impressed;And, as he heard, the hapless kingFelt deeper yet his sorrow's sting.At length, all joy and comfort fled,He raised his eyes with weeping red,And, mournful for his Ráma's sake.The good and glorious monarch spake:'Why seek with idle praise to greetThe wretch for whom no praise is meet!Thy words mine aching bosom tear,

And plunge me deeper in despair.'
   Sumantra heard the sad reply,And saw his master's tearful eye.With reverent palm to palm appliedHe drew a little space aside.Then, as the king, with misery weak,With vain endeavour strove to speak,Kaikeyí, skilled in plot and plan,To sage Sumantra thus began:'The king, absorbed in joyful thoughtFor his dear son, no rest has sought:Sleepless to him the night has past,And now o'erwatched he sinks at lastThen go, Sumantra, and with speed
The glorious Ráma hither lead:
Go, as I pray, nor longer wait;No time is this to hesitate.'   'How can I go, O Ladv fair,Unless my lord his will declare?'   'Fain would I see him,' cried the king,'Quick, quick, my beauteous Ráma bring.'   Then rose the happy thought to cheerThe bosom of the charioteer,'The king, I ween, of pious mind.The consecration has designed.'Sumantra for his wisdom famed,Delighted with the thought he framed,From the calm chamber, like a bay

Of crowded ocean, took his way.
   He turned his face to neither side,    But forth he hurried straight;Only a little while he eyedThe guards who kept the gate.He saw in front a gathered crowd  Of men of every class,Who, parting as he came, allowed  The charioteer to pass.
Footnotes
107:1 See Additional Notes, THE SUPPLIANT DOVE.
108:1 Indra, called also Purandara, Town destroyer.
109:1 Indra's charioteer.
Next: Canto XV.: The Preparations.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XV.: THE PREPARATIONS.
   There slept the Bráhmans, deeply read
In Scripture, till the night had fled;Then, with the royal chaplains, theyTook each his place in long array.There gathered fast the chiefs of trade,Nor peer nor captain long delayed,Assembling all in order dueThe consecrating rite to view.   The morning dawned with cloudless rayOn Pushya's high auspicious day,And Cancer with benignant powerLooked down on Ráma's natal hour.The twice-born chiefs, with zealous heed,Made ready what the rite would need.The well-wrought throne of holy woodAnd goldon urns in order stood.There was the royal chair whereonA tiger's skin resplendent shone;There water, brought for sprinkling thenceWhen, in their sacred confluence,Blend. Jumná's waves with Gangá's tide,From many a holy flood beside,From brook and fountain far and near,From pool and river, sea and mere.

And there were honey, curd, and oil,
Parched rice and grass, the garden's spoil,Fresh milk, eight girls in bright attire,An elephant with eyes of tire;And urns of gold and silver made,With milky branches overlaid,All brimming from each sacred flood,And decked with many a lotus bud
p. 110
And dancing-women fair and free,Gay with their gems, were there to see,Who stood in bright apparel byWith lovely brow and witching eye.White flashed the jewelled chouri there,And shone like moonbeams through the air;The white umbrella overheadA pale and moonlike lustre shed,Wont in pure splendour to precede,And in such rites the pomp to lead.There stood the charger by the sideOf the great bull of snow-white hide;There was all music soft and loud,And bards and minstrels swelled the crowd.For now the monarch bade combineEach custom of his ancient lineWith every rite Ayodhyá's stateObserved, her kings to consecrate.

Then, summoned by the king's behest,
The multitudes together pressed,And, missing still the royal sire,Began, impatient, to inquire:'Who to our lord will tidings bearThat all his people throng the square?Where is the king? the sun is bright,And all is ready for the rite.'
As thus they spoke, Sumantra, tried
In counsel, to the chiefs replied,Gathered from lands on every side:'To Ráma's house I swiftly drave,For so the king his mandate gave.Our aged lord and Ráma tooIn honour high hold all of you:I in your words (be long your days!)Will ask him why he thus delays.'
Thus spoke the peer in Scripture read,
And to the ladies' bower he sped.Quick through the gates Sumantra hied,Which access ne'er to him denied.Behind the curtained screen he drew,Which veiled the chamber from the view.In benediction loud he raisedHis voice, and thus the monarch praised:'Sun, Moon, Kuvera, S'iva bless

Kakutstha's son with high success!
The Lords of air, flood, fire decreeThe victory, my King, to thee!The holy night has past away,Auspicious shines the morning's ray.Rise, Lord of men, thy part to takeIn the great rite. Awake! awake!Bráhmans and captains, chiefs of trade,All wait in festive garb arrayed;For thee they look with eager eyes:O Raghu's son, awake! arise.'
To him in holy Scripture read,
Who hailed him thus, the monarch said,Upraising from his sleep his head:'Go. Ráma hither lead as thouW (illegible) but now.Come, tell me why my mandate laidUpon thee thus is disobeyed.Away! and Ráma hither bring;I sleep not: make no tarrying.'
Thus gave the king command anew:
Sumantra from his lord withdrew;With head in lowly reverence bent,And filled with thoughts of joy, he went,The royal street he traversed, whereWaved flag and pennon to the air,And, as with joy the car he drove,

He let his eyes delighted rove.
On every side, where'er he came,He heard glad words, their theme the same,As in their joy the gathered folkOf Ráma and the throning spoke.Then saw he Ráma's palace brightAnd vast as Mount Kailása's height,That glorious in its beauty showedAs Indra's own supreme abode:With folding doors both high and wide;With hundred porches beautified:Where golden statues towering roseO'er gemmed and coralled porticoesBright like a cave in Meru's side,Or clouds through Autumn's sky that ride:Festooned with length of bloomy twine,Flashing with pearls and jewels' shine,While sandal-wood and aloe lentThe mingled riches of their scent;With all the odorous sweets that fillThe breezy heights of Dardar's hill.There by the gate the Sáras screamed,And shrill-toned peacocks' plumage gleamed.Its floors with deftest art inlaid,Its sculptured wolves in gold arrayed,With its bright sheen the palace tookThe mind of man and chained the look,For like the sun and moon it glowed,And mocked Kuvera's loved abode.

Circling the walls a crowd he viewed
Who stood in reverent attitude,With throngs of countrymen who soughtAcceptance of the gifts they brought.The elephant was stationed there,Appointed Ráma's self to bear;Adorned with pearls, his brow and cheekWere sandal-dyed in many a streak,While he, in stature, bulk, and pride,With Indra's own Airávat  
1 vied.
Sumantra, borne by coursers fleet,Flashing a radiance o'er the street,   To Ráma's palace flew,And all who lined the royal road,Or thronged the prince's rich abode,   Rejoiced as near he drew.And with delight his bosom swelledAs onward still his course he held
p. 111
   Through many a sumptuous courtLike Indra's palace nobly made,Where peacocks revelled in the shade,   And beasts of silvan sort.Through many a hall and chamber wide,That with Kailása's splendour vied.   Or mansions of the Blest,While Ráma's friends, beloved and tried,

Before his coming stepped aside,
   Still on Sumantra pressed.He reached the chamber door, where stoodAround his followers young and good,Bard, minstrel, charioteer,Well skilled the tuneful chords to sweep,With soothing strain to lull to sleep,   Or laud their master dear.Then, like a dolphin darting throughUnfathomed depths of ocean's blue   With store of jewels decked,Through crowded halls that rock-like rose,Or as proud hills where clouds repose,   Sumantra sped unchecked--Halls like the glittering domes on highReared for the dwellers of the sky   By heavenly architect.
Footnotes
110:1 The elephant of Indra.
Next: Canto XVI.: Ráma Summoned.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVI.: RÁMA SUMMONED.
So through the crowded inner door
Sumantra, skilled in ancient lore,On to the private chambers pressedWhich stood apart from all the rest.There youthful warriors, true and bold,Whose ears were ringed with polished gold,All armed with trusty bows and darts,Watched with devoted eyes and hearts.And hoary men, a faithful train,Whose aged hands held staves of cane,The ladies' guard, apparelled fairIn red attire, were stationed there.Soon as they saw Sumantra nigh,Each longed his lord to gratify,And from his seat beside the doorUp sprang each ancient servitor.Then to the warders quickly criedThe skilled Sumantra, void of pride:'Tell Ráma that the charioteerSumantra waits for audience here.'The ancient men with one accordSeeking the pleasure of their lord,Passing with speed the chamber doorTo Ráma's ear the message bore.

Forthwith the prince with duteous heed
Called in the messenger with speed,For 'twas his sire's command, he knew,That sent him for the interview.Like Lord Kuvera, well arrayed,   He pressed a couch of gold,Wherefrom a covering of brocade   Hung down in many a fold.Oil and the sandal's fragrant dust   Had tinged his body o'erDark as the stream the spearman's thrust   Drains from the wounded boar.Him Sítá watched with tender care,   A chouri in her hand,As Chitrá,  
1 ever fond in fair,
   Beside the Moon will stand.Him glorious with unborrowed light,A liberal lord, of sunlike might,Sumantra hailed in words like these,Well skilled in gentle courtesies,As, with joined hands in reverence raised,Upon the beauteous prince he gazed:'Happy Kaus'alyá! Blest is she,The Mother of a son like thee.Now rise, O Ráma, speed away.Go to thy sire without delay:For he and Queen Kaikeyí seekAn interview with thee to speak.'

The lion-lord of men, the best
Of splendid heroes, thus addressed,To Sítá spake with joyful cheer:'The king and qneen, my lady dear,Touching the throning, for my sakeSome salutary counsel take.The lady ot the full black eyeWould fain her husband gratify,And, all his purpose understood,Counsels the monarch to my good.A happy fate is mine, I ween,When he, consulting with his queen,Sumantra on this charge, intentUpon my gain and good, has sent.An envoy of so noble sortWell suits the splendour of the court.The consecration rite this dayWill join me in imperial sway.To meet the lord of earth, for soHis order bids me, I will go.Thou, lady, here in comfort stay,And with thy maidens rest or play.'
Thus Ráma spake. For meet reply
The lady of the large black eyeAttended to the door her lord,And blessings on his head implored:'The majesty and royal stateWhich holy Bráhmans venerate,

The consecration and the rite
Which sanctifies the ruler's might,And all imperial powers should beThine by thy father's high decree,As He, the worlds who formed and planned,The kingship gave to Indra's hand.
p. 112
Then shall mine eyes my king adoreWhen lustral rites and fast are o'er,And black deer's skin and roebuck's hornThy lordly limbs and hand adorn.May He whose hands the thunder wieldBe in the east thy guard and shield;May Yama's care the south befriend,And Varun's arm the west defend;And let Kuvera, Lord of Gold,The north with firm protection hold.'
Then Ráma spoke a kind farewell,
And hailed the blessings as they fellFrom Sítá's gentle lips; and then,As a young lion from his denDescends the mountain's stony side,So from the hall the hero hied.First Lakshman at the door he viewedWho stood in reverent attitude,Then to the central court he pressed

Where watched the friends who loved him best.
To all his dear companions thereHe gave kind looks and greeting fair.On to the lofty car that glowedLike fire the royal tiger strode.Bright as himself its silver shone:A tiger's skin was laid thereon.With cloudlike thunder, as it rolled,It flashed with gems and burnished gold,And, like the sun's meridian blaze,Blinded the eye that none could gaze.Like youthful elephants, tall and strong,Fleet coursers whirled the car along:In such a car the Thousand-eyedBorne by swift horses loves to ride.So like Parjanya,  
1 when he flies
Thundering through the autumn skies,The hero from the palace sped,As leaves the moon some cloud o'erhead.Still close to Ráma Lakshman kept,Behind him to the car he leapt,And, watching with fraternal care,Waved the long chouri's silver hair,As from the palace gate he cameUp rose the tumult of acclaim.While loud huzza and jubilant shoutPealed from the gathered myriads out.Then elephants, like mountains vast,And steeds who all their kind surpassed,

Followed their lord by hundreds, nay
By thousands, led in long array.First marched a band of warriors trained,With sandal dust and aloe stained;Well armed was each with sword and bow,And every breast with hope aglow,And ever, as they onward went,   Shouts from the warrior train,And every sweet-toned instrument   Prolonged the minstrel strain.
On passed the tamer of his foes,
While well clad dames, in crowded rows,Each chamber lattice thronged to view,And chaplets on the hero threw.Then all, of peerless face and limb,Sang Ráma's praise for love of him,And blent their voices, soft and sweet.From palace high and crowded street:'Now, sure, Kaus'alyá's heart must swellTo see the son she loves so well,Thee Ráma, thee, her joy and pride,Triumphant o'er the realm preside.'Then--for they knew his bride most fairOf all who part the soft dark hair,His love, his life, possessed the wholeOf her young hero's heart and soul:--'Be sure the lady's fate repaysSome mighty vow of ancient days,  
1b

For blest with Ráma's love is she
As, with the Moon's, sweet Rohiní.'  2b
Such were the witching words that cameFrom lips of many a peerless dameCrowding the palace roofs to greetThe hero as he gained the street.
Footnotes
111:1 A star in the spike of Virgo: hence the name of 
the mouth Chaitra at Chait.
112:1 The Rain-God.
Next: Canto XVII.: Ráma's Approach.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVII.: RÁMA'S APPROACH.
As Ráma, rendering blithe and gay
His loving friends, pursued his way,He saw on either hand a pressOf mingled people numberless.The royal street he traversed, whereIncense of aloe filled the air,Where rose high palaces, that viedWith paly clouds, on either side;With flowers of myriad colours graced.And food for every varied taste,Bright as the glowing path o'erheadWhich feet of Gods celestial tread,Loud benedictions, sweet to hear,From countless voices soothed his ear.While he to each gave due saluteHis place and dignity to suit:'Be thou,' the joyful people cried,'Be thou our guardian, lord and guide.Throned and anointed king to-day,Thy feet set forth upon the wayWherein, each honoured as a God,Thy fathers and forefathers trod.Thy sire and his have graced the throne,And loving care to us have shown:

Thus blest shall we and ours remain,
Yea still more blest in Ráma's reign.
p. 113
No more of dainty fare we need,And but one cherished object heed,That we may see our prince todayInvested with imperial sway.
Such were the words and pleasant speech
That Ráma heard, unmoved, from eachOf the dear friends around him spread,As onward through the street he sped,For none could turn his eye or thoughtFrom the dear form his glances sought,With fruitless ardour forward castEven when Raghu's son had past.And he who saw not Ráma nigh,Nor caught a look from Ráma's eye,A mark for scorn and general blame,Reproached himself in bitter shame,For to each class his equal mindWith sympathy and love inclinedMost fully of the princely four;So greatest love to him they bore.
His circling course the hero bent
Round shrine and altar, reverent,

Round homes of Gods, where cross-roads met,
Where many a sacred tree was set.Near to his father's house he drewLike Indra's beautiful to view,And with the light his glory gaveWithin the royal palace drave.Through three broad courts, where bowmen keptTheir watch and ward, his coursers swept,Then through the two remaining wentOn foot the prince pre?inent.Through all the courts the hero passed,And gained the ladies' bower at last;Then through the door alone withdrew,And left without his retinue.When thus the monarch's noble boy   Had gone his sire to meet,The multitude, elate with joy,   Stood watching in the street,And his return with eager eyes   Expected at the gates,As for his darling moon to rise   The King of Rivers  
1 waits.
Footnotes
112:1b In a former life.

112:2b One of the lunar asterisms, represented as the 
favourite wife of the Moon. See p. 4, note.
Next: Canto XVIII.: The Sentence.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVIII.: THE SENTENCE.
With hopeless eye and pallid mien
There sat the monarch with the queen.His father's feet with reverence dueHe clasped, and touched Kaikey?s too.The king, with eyes still brimming o'er,Cried 'Ráma!' and could do no more.
His voice was choked, his eye was dim,
He could not speak or look on him.Then sudden fear made Ráma shakeAs though his foot had roused a snake,Soon as his eyes had seen the changeSo mournful, terrible, and strange.For there his reason well-nigh fled,Sighing, with soul disquieted,   To torturing pangs a prey,Dismayed, despairing, and distraught,In a fierce whirl of wildering thought   The hapless monarch lay,Like Ocean wave-engarlandedStorm-driven from his tranquil bed,   The Sun-God in eclipse,Or like a holy seer, heart-stirredWith anguish, when a lying word

   Has passed his heedless lips.
The sight of his dear father, painedWith woe and misery unexplained   Filled Ráma with unrest,As Ocean's pulses rise and swellWhen the great moon he loves so well   Shines full upon his breast.So grieving for his father's sake,To his own heart the hero spake:'Why will the king my sire to-dayNo kindly word of greeting say?At other times, though wroth he be,His eyes grow calm that look on me.Then why does anguish wring his browTo see his well-beloved now?'Sick and perplexed, distraught with woe,To Queen Kaikeyí bowing low,While pallor o'er his bright cheek spread,With humble reverence he said:'What have I done, unknown, amissTo make my father wroth like this?Declare it, O dear Queen, and winHis pardon for my heedless sin.Why is the sire I ever findFilled with all love to-day unkind?With eyes cast down and pallid cheekThis day alone he will not speak.Or lies he prostrate 'neath the blowOf fierce disease or sudden woe?

For all our bliss is dashed with pain,
And joy unmixt is hard to gain.Does stroke of evil fortune smiteDear Bharat, charming to the sight,Or on the brave S'atrughna fall,Or consorts, for he loves them all?Against his words when I rebel,Or fail to please the monarch well,When deeds of mine his soul offend,That hour I pray my life may end.How should a man to him who gaveHis being and his life behave?The sire to whom he owes his birthShould be his deity on earth.Hast thou, by pride and folly moved,
p. 114
With bitter taunt the king reproved?Has scorn of thine or cruel jestTo passion stirred his gentle breast?Speak truly, Queen, that I may knowWhat cause has changed the monarch so.'
Thus by the high-souled prince addressed,
Of Raghu's sons the chief and best,She cast all ruth and shame aside,And bold with greedy words replied:'Not wrath, O Ráma, stirs the king,

Nor misery stabs with sudden sting;
One thought that fills his soul has he,But dares not speak for fear of thee.Thou art so dear, his lips refrainFrom words that might his darling pain.But thou, as duty bids, must stillThe promise of thy sire fulfil.He who to me in days gone byVouchsafed a boon with honours high,Dares now, a king, his word regret,And caitiff-like disowns the debt.The lord of men his promise gaveTo grant the boon that I might crave,And now a bridge would idly throwWhen the dried stream has ceased to flow.His faith the monarch must not breakIn wrath, or e'en for thy dear sake.From faith, as well the righteous know,Our virtue and our merits flow.Now, be they good or be they ill,Do thou thy father's words fulfil:Swear that his promise shall not fail,And I will tell thee all the tale.Yes, Ráma, when I hear that thouHast bound thee by thy father's vow,Then, not till then, my lips shall speak,Nor will he tell what boon I seek.'
He heard, and with a troubled breast

This answer to the queen addressed:
'Ah me, dear lady, canst thou deemThat words like these thy lips beseem?I, at the bidding of my sire,Would cast my body to the fire,A deadly draught of poison drink,Or in the waves of ocean sink:If he command, it shall be done,--My father and my king in one.Then speak and let me know the thingSo longed for by my lord the king.It shall be done: let this suffice;Ráma ne'er makes a promise twice.'
He ended. To the princely youth
Who loved the right and spoke the truth,Cruel, abominable cameThe answer of the ruthless dame:'When Gods and Titans fought of yore,Transfixed with darts and bathed in goreTwo boons to me thy father gaveFor the dear life 'twas mine to save.Of him I claim the ancient debt,That Bharat on the throne be set,And thou, O Ráma, go this dayTo Dandak forest far away.Now, Ráma, if thou wilt maintainThy father's faith without a stain,And thine own truth and honour clear,

Then, best of men, my bidding hear.
Do thou thy father's word obey,Nor from the pledge he gave me stray.Thy life in Dandak forest spendTill nine long years and five shall end.Upon my Bharat's princely headLet consecrating drops be shed,With all the royal pomp for theeMade ready by the king's decree.Seek Dandak forest and resignRites that would make the empire thine,For twice seven years of exile wearThe coat of bark and matted hair.Then in thy stead let Bharat reignLord of his royal sire's domain,Rich in the fairest gems that shine,Cars, elephants, and steeds, and kine.The monarch mourns thy altered fateAnd vails his brow compassionate:Bowed down by bitter grief he liesAnd dares not lift to thine his eyes.Obey his word: be firm and brave,And with great truth the monarch save.'   While thus with cruel words she spoke,     No grief the noble youth betrayed;   But forth the father's anguish broke,     At his dear Ráma's lot dismayed.

Footnotes
113:1 The Sea.
Next: Canto XIX.: Ráma's Promise.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIX.: RÁMA'S PROMISE.
Calm and unmoved by threatened woe
The noble conqueror of the foeAnswered the cruel words she spoke,Nor quailed beneath the murderous stroke:
Yea, for my father's promise sake
I to the wood my way will take,And dwell a lonely exile thereIn hermit dress with matted hair.One thing alone I fain would learn,Why is the king this day so stern?Why is the scourge of foes so cold,Nor gives me greeting as of old?Now let not anger flush thy cheek:Before thy face the truth I speak,In hermit's coat with matted hairTo the wild wood will I repair.How can I fail his will to do,Friend, master, grateful sovereign too?One only pang consumes my breast.That his own lips have not expressedHis will, nor made his longing knownThat Bharat should ascend the throne.

p. 115
To Bharat I would yield my wife,
My realm and wealth, mine own dear life,Unasked I fain would yield them all:More gladly at my father's call,More gladly when the gift may freeHis honour and bring joy to thee.Thus, lady, his sad heart releaseFrom the sore shame, and give him peace.But tell me, O, I pray thee, whyThe lord of men, with downcast eye,Lies prostrate thus, and one by oneDown his pale cheek the tear-drops run.Let couriers to thy father speedOn horses of the swiftest breed,And, by the mandate of the king,Thy Bharat to his presence bring.My father's words I will not stayTo question, but this very dayTo Dandak's pathless wild will fare,For twice seven years an exile there.'
When Ráma thus had made reply
Kaikeyí's heart with joy beat high.She, trusting to the pledge she held,The youth's departure thus impelled:''Tis well. Be messengers despatchedOn coursers ne'er for fleetness matched,

To seek my father's home and lead
My Bharat back with all their speed.And, Ráma, as I ween that thouWilt scarce endure to linger now,So surely it were wise and goodThis hour to journey to the wood.And if, with shame cast down and weak,No word to thee the king can speak,Forgive, and from thy mind dismissA trifle in an hour like this.But till thy feet in rapid hasteHave left the city for the waste,And to the distant forest fled,He will not bathe nor call for bread.'
'Woe! woe!' from the sad monarch burst,
In surging floods of grief immersed;Then swooning, with his wits astray,Upon the gold-wrought couch he lay,And Ráma raised the aged king:But the stern queen, unpitying,Checked not her needless words, nor sparedThe hero for all speed prepared,But urged him with her bitter tongue,Like a good horse with lashes stung.She spoke her shameful speech. SereneHe heard the fury of the queen,And to her words so vile and dreadGently, unmoved in mind, he said:

'I would not in this world remain
A grovelling thrall to paltry gain,But duty's path would fain pursue,True as the saints themselves are true.From death itself I would not flyMy father's wish to gratify.What deed soe'er his loving sonMay do to please him, think it done.Amid all duties, Queen, I countThis duty first and paramount,That sons, obedient, aye fulfilTheir honoured fathers' word and will.Without his word, if thou decree,Forth to the forest will I flee,And there shall fourteen years be spentMid lonely wilds in banishment.Methinks thou couldst not hope to findOne spark of virtue in my mind,If thou, whose wish is still my lord,Hast for this grace the king implored.This day I go, but, ere we part,Must cheer my Sítá's tender heart.To my dear mother bid farewell;Then to the woods, a while to dwell.With thee, O Queen, the care must restThat Bharat hear his sire's behest,And guard the land with righteous sway,For such the law that lives for aye.'

In speechless woe the father heard,
Wept with loud cries, but spoke no word.Then Ráma touched his senseless feet,And hers, for honour most unmeet;Round both his circling steps he bent,Then from the bower the hero went.Soon as he reached the gate he foundHis dear companions gathered round.Behind him came Sumitrás childWith weeping eyes so sad and wild.Then saw he all that rich arrayOf vases for the glorious day.Round them with reverent stops he paced,Nor veiled his eye, nor moved in haste.The loss of empire could not dimThe glory that encompassed him.So will the Lord of Cooling Rays  
1
On whom the world delights to gaze,Through the great love of all retainSweet splendour in the time of wane.Now to the exile's lot resignedHe left the rule of earth behind:As though all worldly cares he spurnedNo trouble was in him discerned.The chouries that for kings are used,And white umbrella, he refused,Dismissed his chariot and his men,And every friend and citizen.He ruled his senses, nor betrayed

The grief that on his bosom weighed,
And thus his mother's mansion soughtTo tell the mournful news he brought.Nor could the gay-clad people thereWho flocked round Ráma true and fair,One sign of altered fortune traceUpon the splendid hero's face.Nor had the chieftain, mighty-armed.Lost the bright look all hearts that charmed,
p. 116
As e'en from autumn moons is thrownA splendour which is all their own.With his sweet voice the hero spokeSaluting all the gathered folk,Then righteous-souled and great in fameClose to his mother's house he came.Lakshman the brave, his brother's peerIn princely virtues, followed near,Sore troubled, but resolved to showNo token of his secret woe.Thus to the palace Ráma went   Where all were gay with hope and joy;But well he knew the dire event   That hope would mar, that bliss destroy.So to his grief he would not yield   Lest the sad change their hearts might rend,And, the dread tiding unrevealed,

   Spared from the blow each faithful friend.
Footnotes
115:1 The Moon.
Next: Canto XX.: Kaus'alyá's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XX.: KAUS'ALYÁ'S LAMENT.
But in the monarch's palace, when
Sped from the bower that lord of men,Up from the weeping women wentA mighty wail and wild lament:'Ah, he who ever freely didHis duty ere his sire could bid,Our refuge and our sure defence,This day will go an exile hence,He on Kaus'alyá loves to waitMost tender and affectionate,And as he treats his mother, thusFrom childhood has he treated us.On themes that sting he will not speak,And when reviled is calm and meek.He soothes the angry, heals offence:He goes to-day an exile hence.Our lord the king is most unwise,And looks on life with doting eyes,Who in his folly casts awayThe world's protection, hope, and stay.'
Thus in their woe, like kine bereaved
Of their young calves,  
1 the ladies grieved,

And ever as they wept and wailed
With keen reproach the king assailed.Their lamentation, mixed with tears,Smote with new grief the monarch's ears,Who, burnt with woe too great to bear,Fell on his couch and fainted there.
Then Ráma, smitten with the pain
His heaving heart could scarce restrain,Groaned like an elephant and strodeWith Lakshman to the queen's abode.A warder there, whose hoary eldIn honour high by all was held,Guarding the mansion, sat beforeThe portal, girt with many more.Swift to their feet the warders sprang,And loud the acclamation rang,Hail, Ráma! as to him they bent,Of victor chiefs preëminent.One court he passed, and in the nextSaw, masters of each Veda text,A crowd of Bráhmans, good and sage,Dear to the king for lore and age.To these he bowed his reverent head,Thence to the court beyond he sped.Old dames and tender girls, their careTo keep the doors, were stationed there.And all, when Ráma came in view,Delighted to the chamber flew,

To bear to Queen Kaus'alyás ear
The tidings that she loved to hear.The queen, on rites and prayer intent,In careful watoh the night had spent,And at the dawn, her son to aid,To Vishnu holy offerings made.Firm in her vows, serenely glad.In robes of spotless linen clad,As texts prescribe, with grace implored,Her offerings in the fire she poured.Within her splendid bower he came,And saw her feed the sacred flameThere oil, and grain, and vases stood,With wreaths, and curds, and cates, and wood,And milk, and sesamum, and rice,The elements of sacrifice.She, worn and pale with many a fastAnd midnight hours in vigil past,In robes of purest white arrayed,To Lakshmí Queen drink-offerings paid.So long away, she flew to meet   The darling of her soul:So runs a mare with eager feet   To welcome back her foal.He with his firm support upheld   The queen, as near she drew,And, by maternal love impelled,   Her arms around him threw.Her hero son, her matchless boy

   She kissed upon the head:
She blessed him in her pride and joy   With tender words, and said:
p. 117
"Be like thy royal sires of old,The nobly good, the lofty-souled!Their lengthened days and fame be thine,And virtue, as beseems thy line!The pious king, thy father, seeTrue to his promise made to thee:That truth thy sire this day will show,And regent's power on thee bestow."
She spoke. He took the proffered seat,
And as she pressed her son to eat,Raised reverent bands, and, touched with shame,Made answer to the royal dame:
  "Dear lady, thou hast yet to know
That danger threats, and heavy woe:A grief that will with sore distressOn Sítá, thee, and Lakshman press.What need of seats have such as I?This day to Dandak wood I fly.The hour is come, a time, unmeetFor silken couch and gilded seat.I must to lonely wilds repair,

Abstain from flesh, and living there
On roots, fruit, honey, hermit's food,Pass twice seven years in solitude.To Bharat's hand the king will yieldThe regent power I thought to wield,And me, a hermit, will he sendMy days in Dandak wood to spend."
As when the woodman's axe has lopped
A S'al branch in the grove, she dropped:So from the skies a Goddess fallsEjected from her radiant halls.
When Ráma saw her lying low,
Prostrate by too severe a blow,Around her form his arms he woundAnd raised her fainting from the ground.His hand upheld her like a mareWho feels her load too sore to bear,And sinks upon the way o'ertoiled,And all her limbs with dust are soiled.He soothed her in her wild distressWith loving touch and soft caress.She, meet for highest fortune, eyedThe hero watching by her side,And thus, while Lakshman bent to hear,Addressed her son with many a tear:"If, Ráma, thou had ne'er been bornMy child to make thy mother mourn,

Though reft of joy, a childless queen,
Such woe as this I ne'er had seen.Though to the childless wife there clingsOne sorrow armed with keenest stings,'No child have I: no child have I,'No second misery prompts the sigh.When long I sought, alas, in vain,My husband's love and bliss to gain,In Ráma all my hopes I setAnd dreamed I might be happy yet.I, of the consorts first and best,Must bear my rivals' taunt and jest,And brook, though better far than they,The soul distressing words they say.What woman can be doomed to pineIn misery more sore than mine,Whose hopeless days must still be spentIn grief that ends not and lament?They scorned me when my son was nigh;When he is banished I must die.Me, whom my husband never prized,Kaikeyí's retinue despisedWith boundless insolence, though sheTops not in rank nor equals me.And they who do me service yet,Nor old allegiance quite forget,Whene'er they see Kaikeyí's son,With silent lips my glances shun.How, O my darling, shall I brook

Each menace of Kaikeyí's look,
And listen, in my low estate,To taunts of one so passionate?For seventeen years since thou wast bornI sat and watched, ah me, forlorn!Hoping some blessed day to seeDeliverance from my woes by thee.Now comes this endless grief and wrong,So dire I cannot bear it long,Sinking, with age and sorrow worn.Beneath my rivals' taunts and scorn.How shall I pass in dark distressMy long lone days of wretchednessWithout my Ráma's face, as brightAs the full moon to cheer my sight?Alas, my cares thy steps to train,And fasts, and vows, and prayers are vain.Hard, hard, I ween, must be this heartTo hear this blow nor burst apart,As some great river bank, when firstThe floods of Rain-time on it burst.   No, Fate that speeds not will not slay,     Nor Yama's halls vouchsafe me room,   Or, like a lion's weeping prey,     Death now had borne me to my doom.   Hard is my heart and wrought of steel     That breaks not with the crushing blow,   Or in the pangs this day I feel     My lifeless frame had sunk below.

   Death waits his hour, nor takes me now:
     But this sad thought augments my pain,   That prayer and largess, fast and vow,      And Heavenward service are in vain.    Ah me, ah me! with fruitless toil      Of rites austere a child I sought:    Thus seed cast forth on barren soil      Still lifeless lies and comes to naught.    If ever wretch by anguish grieved      Before his hour to death had fled,    I mourning, like a cow bereaved,      Had been this day among the dead."
p. 118
Footnotes
116:1 The comparison may to a European reader seem a 
homely one. But Spenser likens an infuriate woman to a 
cow 'That is berobbed of her youngling dere.' Shakspeare also makes King Henry VI. compare himself to the calf's mother that 'Runs lowing up and down, Looking the way her harmless young one went.' 'Cows,' says De Quincey, 'are amongst the gentlest of breathing creatures; none show more passionate tenderness to their young, when deprived of them, and, in short, I am not ashamed to profess a deep love for 

these gentle creatures.'
Next: Canto XXI.: Kaus'alyá Calmed.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXI.: KAUS'ALYÁ CALMED.
While thus Kaus'alyá wept and sighed.
With timely words sad Lakshman cried:'O honoured Queen I like it illThat, subject to a woman's will,Ráma his royal state should quitAnd to an exile's doom submit.The aged king, fond, changed, and week,Will as the queen compels him speak.But why should Ráma thus be sentTo the wild woods in banishment?No least offence I find in him,I see no fault his fame to dim.Not one in all the world I know,Not outcast wretch, not secret foe,Whose whispering lips would dare assailHis spotless life with slanderous tale.Godlike and bounteous, just, sincere,E'en to his very foemen dear:Who would without a cause neglectThe right, and such a son reject?And if a king such order gave,In second childhood, passion's slave,What son within his heart would layThe senseless order, and obey?

Come, Ráma, ere this plot be known
Stand by me and secure the throne.Stand like the King who rules below,Stand aided by thy brother's bow:How can the might of meaner menResist thy royal purpose then!My shafts, if rebels court their fate,Shall lay Ayodhyá desolate.Then shall her streets with blood be dyedOf those who stand on Bharat's side:None shall my slaughtering hand exempt,For gentle patience earns contempt.If, by Kaikeyís counsel changed,Our father's heart be thus estranged,No mercy must our arm restrain,But let the foe be slain, be slain.For should the guide, respected long,No more discerning right and wrorg,Turn in forbidden paths to stray,'Tis meet that force his steps should stay.What power sufficient can he see,What motive for the wish has he,That to Kaikeyí would resignThe empire which is justly thine?Can he, O conqueror of thy foes,Thy strength and mine in war oppose?Can he entrust, in our despite,To Bharat's hand thy royal right!I love this brother with the whole

Affection of my faithful soul.
Yea Queen, by bow and truth I swear,By sacrifice, and gift, and prayer,If Ráma to the forest goes,Or where the burning furnace glows,First shall my feet the forest tread,The flames shall first surround my head.My might shall chase thy grief and tears,As darkness flies when morn appears.Do thou, dear Queen, and Ráma tooBehold what power like mine can do.My aged father I will kill,The vassal of Kaikeyí's will,Old, yet a child, the woman's thrall,Infirm, and base, the scorn of all.'   Thus Lakshman cried,the mighty-souled:Down her sad cheeks the torrents rolled,As to her son Kaus'aly?spake:   'Now thou hast heard thy brother, takeHis counsel if thou hold it wise,And do the thing his words advise.Do not, my son, with tears I pray,My rival's wicked word obey,Leave me not here consumed with woe,Nor to the wood, an exile, go.If thou, to virtue ever true,Thy duty's path would still pursue,The highest duty bids thee stayAnd thus thy mother's voice obey.

Thus Kas'yap's great ascetic son
A seat among the Immortals won:In his own home, subdued, he stayed,And honour to his mother paid.If reverence to thy sire be due,Thy mother claims like honour too,And thus I charge thee, O my child,Thou must not seek the forest wild.Ah, what to me were life and bliss,Condemned my darling son to miss?But with my Ráma near, to eatThe very grass itself were sweet.But if thou still wilt go and leave.Thy hapless mother here to grieve,I from that hour will food abjure,Nor life without my son endure.Then it will be thy fate to dwellIn depth of world-detested hell.As Ocean in the olden timeWas guilty of an impious crimeThat marked the lord of each fair floodAs one who spills a Br?maa'a blood.' 
1
   Thus spake the queen, and wept, and sighed:Then righteous Ráma thus replied:'I have no power to slight or breakCommandments which my father spake.I bend my head, dear lady, low,Forgive me, for I needs must go.Once Kaudu, mighty saint, who made

His dwelling in the forest shade,
p. 119
A cow--and duty's claims he knew--
Obedient to his father, slew.And in the line from which we spring,When ordered by their sire the king,Through earth the sons of Sagar cleft,And countless things of life bereft.  
1
So Jamadagní's son  2 obeyed
His sire, when in the wood he laidHia hand upon his axe, and smoteThrough Renuká his mother's throat.The deeds of these and more beside.Peers of the Gods, my steps shall guide,And resolute will I fulfilMy father's word, my father's will,Nor I, O Queen, unsanctioned treadThis righteous path, by duty led:The road my footsteps journey o'erWas traversed by the great of yore.This high command which all acceptShall faithfully by me be kept,For duty ne'er will him forsakeWho fears his sire's command to break.'
Thus to his mother wild with grief:
Then thus to Lakshman spake the chief

Of those by whom the bow is bent,
Mid all who speak, most eloquent:'I know what love for me thou hast,What firm devotion unsurpassed:Thy valour and thy worth I know,And glory that appals the foe.Blest youth, my mother's woe is great.It bends her 'neath its matchless weight:No claims will she, with blinded eyes,Of truth and patience recognize,For duty is supreme in place,And truth is duty's noblest base.Obedient to my sire's behestI serve the cause of duty best.For man should truly do whate'erTo mother, Bráhman, sire, he sware:He must in duty's path remain,Nor let his word be pledged in vain.And, O my brother, how can IObedience to this charge deny?Kaikeyí's tongue my purpose spurred,But 'twas my sire who gave the word.Cast these unholy thoughts asideWhich smack of war and Warriors' pride;To duty's call, not wrath attend,And tread the path which I commend,'
Ráma by fond affection moved
His brother Lakshman thus reproved;

Then with joined hands and reverent head
Again to Queen Kausályá said:
'I needs must go--do thou consent--
To the wild wood in banishment.O give me, by my life I pray,Thy blessing ere I go away.
I, when the promised years are o'er,
Shall see Ayodhyá's town once more.Then, mother dear, thy tears restrain,Nor let thy heart be wrung by pain:In time, my father's will obeyed,Shall I return from greenwood shade.My dear Videhan, thou, and I,Lakshman, Sumitrá, feel this tie,And must my father's word obey,As duty bids that rules for aye.Thy preparations now forgo,And lock within thy breast thy woe,Nor be my pious wish withstoodTo go an exile to the wood."Calm and unmoved the prince explained   His duty's claim and purpose high.The mother life and sense regained,   Looked on her son and made reply:'If reverence be thy father's due,   The same by right and love is mine:Go not, my charge I thus renew,

   Nor leave me here in woe to pine,
What were such lonely life to me,   Rites to the shades, or deathless lot?More dear, my son, one hour with thee   Than all the world where thou art not.As bursts to view, when brands blaze high,   Some elephant concealed by night,So, when he heard his mother's cry,   Burnt Ráma's grief with fiercer might.Thus to the queen, half senseless still,   And Lakshman, burnt with heart-felt pain,True to the right, with steadfast will,   His duteous speech he spoke again:'Brother, I know thy loving mind,   Thy valour and thy truth I know,But now to claims of duty blind   Thou and my mother swell my woe.The fruits of deeds in human life   Make love, gain, duty, manifest,Dear when they meet as some fond wife   With her sweet babes upon her breast.But man to duty first should turn   Whene'er the three are not combined:For those who heed but gain we spurn,   And those to pleasure all resigned.Shall then the virtuous disobey   Hosts of an aged king and sire,Though feverous joy that father sway,   Or senseless love or causeless ire?

I have no powcr, commanded thus,
   To slight his promise and decree:The honoured sire of both of us,   My mother's lord and life is he.Shall she, while yet the holy king   Is living, on the right intent,--Shall she, like some poor widowed thing,   Go forth with me to banishment?Now, mother, speed thy parting son,   And let thy blessing soothe my pain,
p. 120
That I may turn, mine exile done,   Like King Yayáti, home again.Fair glory and the fruit she gives,   For lust of sway I ne'er will slight:What, for the span a mortal lives.   Were rule of earth without the right?'He soothed her thus, firm to the last   His counsel to his brother told:Then round the queen in reverence passed,   And held her in his loving hold.
Footnotes

118:1 The commentators say that, in a former creation, 
Ocean grieved his mother and suffered in consequence 
the pains of hell.
119:1 As described in Book I, Canto XL.
119:2 Parasúráma.
Next: Canto XXII.: Lakshman Calmed.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXII.: LAKSHMAN CALMED.
So Ráma kept unshaken still
His noble heart with iron will.To his dear brother next he turned,Whose glaring eyes with fury burned,Indignant, panting like a snake,And thus again his counsel spake:'Thine anger and thy grief restrain,And firm in duty's path remain.Dear brother, lay thy scorn aside,And be the right thy joy and pride.Thy ready zeal and thoughtful careTo aid what rites should grace the heir,--These 'tis another's now to ask;Come, gird thee for thy noble task,That Bharat's throning rites may heGraced with the things prepared for me.And with thy gentle care provideThat her fond heart, now sorely triedWith fear and longing for my sake,With doubt and dread may never ache.To know that thoughts of coming illOne hour that tender bosom fillWith agony and dark despairIs grief too great for me to bear.

I cannot, brother, call to mind
One wilful fault or undesigned,When I have pained in anythingMy mothers or my sire the king.The right my father keeps in view,In promise, word, and action true;Let him then all his fear dismiss,Nor dread the loss of future bliss.He fears his truth herein will fail:Hence bitter thoughts his heart assail.He trembles lest the rites proceed,And at his pangs my heart should bleed.So now this earnest wish is mine,The consecration to resign,And from this city turn awayTo the wild wood with no delay.My banishment to-day will freeKaikeyí from her cares, that she,At last contented and elate,May Bharat's throning celebrate.
Then will the lady's trouble cease,
Then will her heart have joy and peace,When wandering in the wood I wearDeerskin, and bark, and matted hair.Nor shall by me his heart be grievedWhose choice approved, whose mind conceivedThis counsel which I follow. No,Forth to the forest will I go.

'Tis Fate, Sumitrás son, confess,
That sends me to the wilderness.'Tis Fate alone that gives awayTo'other hands the royal swayHow could Kaikeyí's purpose bringOn me this pain and suffering,Were not her change of heart decreedBy Fate whose will commands the deed?I know my filial love has beenThe same throughout for every queen,And with the same affection sheHas treated both her son and me.Her shameful words of cruel spiteTo stay the consecrating rite,And drive me banished from the throne,--These I ascribe to Fate alone,How could she, born of royal race,Whom nature decks with fairest grace,Speak like a dame of low degreeBefore the king to torture me?But Fate, which none may comprehend,To which all life must bow and bend,In her and me its power has shown,And all my hopes are overthrown.What man, Sumitrá's darling, mayContend with Fate's resistless sway,Whose all-commanding power we findOur former deeds alone can bind?Our life and death, our joy and pain,

Anger and fear, and loss and gain,
Each thing that is, in every state,All is the work of none but Fate.E'en saints, inspired with rigid zeal.When once the stroke of Fate they feel,In sternest vows no more engage,And fall enslaved by love and rage.So now the sudden stroke whose weightDescends unlooked for, comes of Fate,And with unpitying might destroysThe promise of commencing joys.Weigh this true counsel in thy soul:With thy firm heart thy heart control;Then, brother, thou wilt cease to grieveFor hindered rites which now I leave.So cast thy needless grief away,And strictly my commands obey.Those preparations check with speed,Nor let my throning rites proceed.Those urns that stand prepared to shedKing-making drops upon my head,Shall, with their pure lustrations nowInaugurate my hermit's vow.
p. 121
Yet what have I to do with thingsThat touch the state and pomp of kings?These hands of mine shall water take

To sanctify the vow I make.
Now Lakshman, let thy heart no moreMy fortune changed and lost deplore.A forest life more joys may bringThan those that wait upon a king,Now though her arts successful mar     My consecrating rite,   Let not the youngest queen too far     Thy jealous fear excite.   Nor let one thought suggesting ill     Upon our father fall,   But let thy heart remember still     That Fate is lord of all.'
Next: Canto XXIII.: Lakshman's Anger.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIII.: LAKSHMAN'S ANGER.
Thus Rama to his brother said;
And Laksbnmn bent his drooping head.In turns by grief and pride impelled,A middle course of thought he held,Then in a frown of anger, bentHis brows that chief most excellent,And like a serpent in his hole,Breathed fierce and fast in wrath of soul.His threatening brows so darkly frowned,His eyes so fiercely glanced around,They made his glare, which none might brook,Like some infuriate lion's look.Like some wild elephant, full oftHe raised and shook his hand  
1 aloft.
Now turned his neck to left and rightNow bent, now raised its stately height.Now in his rage that sword he feltWhich mangling wounds to foemen dealt,With sidelong glance his brother eyed,And thus in burning words replied:'Thy rash resolve, thy eager haste,Thy mighty fear, are all misplaced:No room is here for duty's claim,No cause to dread the people's blame.

Can one as brave as thou consent
To use a coward's argument?The glory of the Warrior raceWith craven speech his lips debase?Can one like thee so falsely speak,Exalling Fate, confessed so weak?Canst thou, undoubting still restrain?Suspicions of those sinful twain?
Canst thou, most duteous, fail to know
Their hearts are set on duty's show?They with deceit have set their trains,And now the fruit rewards their pains,Had they not long ago agreed,O Rama, on this treacherous deed,That promised boon, so long retained,He erst had given and she had gained.I cannot, O my brother, bearTo see another throned as heirWith rites which all our people hate:Then, O, this passion tolerate.This vaunted duty which can guideThy steps from wisdom's path aside,And change the counsel of thy breast,O lofty-hearted, I detest.Wilt thou, when power and might are thine,Submit to this abhorred design?Thy father's impious hest fulfil,That vassal of Kaikeyi's will?

But if thou still wilt shut thine eyes,
Nor see the guile herein that lies.My soul is sad, I deeply mourn.And duty seems a thing to scorn.Canst thou one moment think to pleaseThis pair who live for love and ease,And 'gainst thy peace, as foes, allied,With tenderest names their hatred hideNow if thy judgment still refersTo Fate this plot of his and hers,My mind herein can ne'er agree:And O, in this be ruled by me.Weak, void of manly pride are theyWho bend to Fate's imputed sway:The choicest souls, the nobly greatDisdain to bow their heads to Fate.And he who dares his Fate controlWith vigorous act and manly soul,Though threatening Fate his hopes assail.Unmoved through all need never quail.This day mankind shall learn arightThe power of Fate and human might,So shall the gulf that lies betweenA man and Fate be clearly seen.The might of Fate subdued by meThis hour the citizens shall see,Who saw its intervention stayThy consecrating rites to-dayMy power shall turn this Fate aside,

That threatens, as, with furious stride,
An elephant who scorns to feel,In rage unchecked, tne driver's steel.Not the great Lords whose sleepless mightProtects the worlds, shall stay the riteThough earth, hell, heaven combine their powers:And shall we fear this sire of ours?Then if their minds are idly bentTo doom thee, King, to banishment,Through twice seven years of exile they
p. 122
Shall In the lonely forest stay.I will consume the hopes that fireThe queen Kaikeyí and our sire,That to her son this check will bringAdvantage, making Bharat king.The power of Fate will ne'er withstandThe might that arms my vigorous hand;If danger and distress assail,My fearless strength will still prevail.A thousand circling years shall flee:The forest then thy home shall be,And thy good sons, succeeding, holdThe empire which their sire controlled.The royal saints, of old who reigned,For aged kings this rest ordained:These to their sons their realm commit

That they, like sires, may cherish it.
O pious soul, if thou declineThe empire which is justly thine,Lest, while the king distracted lies,Disorder in the state should rise,I,--or no mansion may I findIn worlds to hero souls assigned,--The guardian of thy realm will be,As the sea-bank protects the sea.Then cast thine idle fears aside:With prosperous rites be sanctified.The lords of earth may strive in vain:My power shall all their force restrain.My pair of arms, my warrior's bowAre not for pride of empty show:For no support these shafts were made;And binding up ill suits my blade:To pierce the foe with deadly breach--This is the work of all and each.But small, methinks the love I showFor him I count my mortal foe.Soon as my trenchant steel is bare,Flashing its lightning through the air,I heed no foe, nor stand aghastThough Indra's self the levin cast.Then shall the ways be hard to pass,Where chariots lie in ruinous mass;When elephant and man and steedCrushed in the murderous onslaught bleed,

And legs and heads tall, heap on heap,
Beneath my sword's tremendous sweep.Struck by my keen brand's trenchant blade,Thine enemies shall fall dismayed,Like towering mountains rent in twain,Or lightning clouds that burst in rain.When armed with brace and glove I stand,And take my trusty bow in hand,Who then shall vaunt his might? who dareCount him a man to meet me there?Then will I loose my shafts, and strikeMan, elephant, and steed alike:At one shall many an arrow fly,And many a foe with one shall die.This day the world my power shall see,That none in arms can rival me:My strength the monarch shall abase,And set thee, lord, in lordliest place.These arms which breathe the sandal's   scent,Which golden bracelets ornament,These hands which precious gifts bestow,Which guard the friend and smite the foe,A nobler service shall assay,And fight in Ráma's cause to-day,The robbers of thy rights to stay.   Speak, brother, tell thy foeman's name     Whom I, in conquering strife,   May strip of followers and fame,

     Of fortune, or of life.
   Say, how may all this sea-girt land     Be brought to own thy sway:   Thy faithful servant here I stand     To listen and obey.'   Then strove the bride of Raghu's race     Sad Lakshman's heart to cheer,   While slowly down the hero's face,     Unchecked, there rolled a tear.   'The orders of my sire,' he cried,     'My will shall ne'er oppose:   I follow still, whate'er betide,     The path which duty shows.'
        * * * * *
Footnotes
121:1 The Sanskrit word hasta signifies both hand, and 
the trunk of the beast that bears between his eyes a 
serpent for a hand.'
Next: Canto XXIV.: Kaus'alyá Calmed.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIV.: KAUS'ALYÁ CALMED.
But when Kaus'alyá saw that he
Resolved to keep his sire's decree,While tears and sobs her utterance broke,Her very righteous speech she spoke:'Can he, a stranger yet to pain,Whose pleasant words all hearts enchain,Son of the king and me the queen,Live on the grain his hands may glean;Can he, whose slaves and menials eatThe finest cakes of sifted wheat--Can Ráma in the forest liveOn roots and fruit which woodlands giveWho will believe, who will not fearWhen the sad story smites his ear,That one so dear, so noble held,Is by the king his sire expelled?Now surely none may Fate resist,Which orders all as it may list,If, Ráma, in thy strength and grace,The woods become thy dwelling-place.A childless mother long I grieved,And many a sigh for offspring heaved,With wistful longing weak and wornTill thou at last, my son, wast born.

Fanned by the storm of that desire
Deep in my soul I felt the fire,Whose offerings flowed from weeping eyes,With fuel fed of groans and sighs,
p. 123
While round the flame the smoke grew hotOf tears because thou earnest not.Now reft of thee, too fiery fierceThe flame of woe my heart will pierce,As, when the days of spring return,The sun's hot beams the forest burn.The mother cow still follows nearThe wanderings of her youngling dear.So close to thine my feet shall be,Where'er thou goest following thee.'
Ráma, the noblest lord of men,
Heard his fond mother's speech, and thenIn soothing words like these repliedTo the sad queen who wept and sighed:'Nay, by Kaikeyí's art beguiled,When I am banished to the wild,If thou, my mother, also fly,The aged king will surely die.When wedded dames their lords forsake,Long for the crime their souls shall ache.Thou must not e'en in thought within

Thy bosom frame so dire a sin.
Long as Kakutstha's son, who reignsLord of the earth, in life remains,Thou must with love his will obey:This duty claims, supreme for aye.Yes, mother, thou and I must beSubmissive to my sire's decree,King, husband, sire is he confessed,The lord of all, the worthiest.I in the wilds my days will spendTill twice seven years have reached an end,Then with great joy will come again,And faithful to thy hests remain.'
Kaus'alyá by her son addressed,
With love and passion sore distressed,Afflicted, with her eyes bedewed,To Ráma thus her speech renewed:
'Nay, Ráma, but my heart will break
If with these queens my home I make.Lead me too with thee; let me goAnd wander like a woodland roe.'
Then, while no tear the hero shed.
Thus to the weeping queen he said:'Mother, while lives the husband, heIs woman's lord and deity.O dearest lady, thou and I

Our lord and king must ne'er deny;
The lord of earth himself have weOur guardian wise and friend to be.And Bharat, true to duty's call,Whose sweet words take the hearts of all,Will serve thee well, and ne'er forgetThe virtuous path before him set.Be this, I pray, thine earnest care,That the old king my father ne'er,When I have parted hence, may know,Grieved for his son, a pang of woe.Let not this grief his soul distress,To kill him with the bitterness.With duteous care, in every thing,Love, comfort, cheer the aged king.Though, best of womankind, a spouseKeeps firmly all her fasts and vows,Nor yet her husband's will obeys, 'She treads in sin's forbidden ways.She to her husband's will who bends,Goes to high bliss that never ends,Yea, though the Gods have found in herNo reverential worshipper.Bent on his weal, a woman stillMust seek to do her husband's will:For Scripture, custom, law upholdThis duty Heaven revealed of old.Honour true Bráhmans for my sake,And constant offerings duly make,

With fire-oblations and with flowers,
To all the host of heavenly powers.Look to the coming time, and yearnFor the glad hour of my return.And still thy duteous course pursue,Abstemious, humble, kind, and true.The highest bliss shall thou obtainWhen I from exile come again,If, best of those who keep the right,The king my sire still see the light.'
The queen, by Ráma thus addressed,
Still with a mother's grief oppressed,While her long eyes with tears were dim,Began once more and answered him:'Not by my pleading maybe stayedThe firm resolve thy soul has made.My hero, thou wilt go; and noneThe stern commands of Fate may shun.Go forth, dear child whom naught can bendAnd may all bliss thy steps attend.Thou wilt return, and that dear dayWill chase mine every grief away.Thou wilt return, thy duty done,Thy vows discharged, high glory won;From filial debt wilt thou be free,And sweetest joy will come on me.My son, the will of mighty FateAt every time must dominate,

If now it drives thee hence to stray
Heedless of me who bid thee stay.Go, strong of arm, go forth, my boy,Go forth, again to come with joy,And thine expectant mother cheerWith those sweet tones she loves to hear.O that the blessed hour were nighWhen thou shalt glad this anxious eye,With matted hair and hermit dressreturning from the wilderness.'   Kaus'alyá's conscious soul approved,     As her proud glance she bent   On Ráma constant and unmoved,     Resolved on banishment.   Such words, with happy omens fraught     To her dear son she said,   Invoking with each eager thought     A blessing on his head.
p. 124
Next: Canto XXV.: Kaus'alya's Blessing.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXV.: KAUS'ALYA'S BLESSING.
Her grief and woe she cast aside,
Her lips with water purified,And thus her benison beganThat mother of the noblest man:'If thou wilt hear no words of mine,Go forth, thou pride of Raghu's line.Go, darling, and return with speed,Walking where noble spirits lead.May virtue on thy steps attend.And be her faithful lover's friend.May Those to whom thy vows are paidIn temple and in holy shade,With all the mighty saints combineTo keep that precious life of thine.The arms wise Vis'v?itra 
1 gave
Thy virtuous soul from danger save.Long be thy life: thy sure defenceShall b?thy truthful innocence,And that obedience, naught can tire,To me thy mother and thy sire.May fanes where holy fires are fed,Altars with grass and fuel spread,Each sacrificial ground, each tree,Rock, lake, and mountain, prosper thee.

Let old Vir?, 2 and Him who made
The universe, combine to aid;
Let Indra and each guardian LordWho keeps the worlds, their help afford,And be thy constant friend the Sun,Lord P?h? Bhaga, Aryaman. 
3
Fortnights and seasons, nights and days,Years, months, and hours, protect thy ways,Vrihaspati shall still be nigh,The War-God, and the Moon on high,And N?ad 
4 and the sainted seven 5
Shall watch thee from their starry heaven.The mountains, and the seas which ringThe world, and Varuna the King,Sky, ether, and the wind, whate'erMoves not or moves, for thee shall care.Each lunar mansion be benign,With happier light the planets shine;All gods, each light in heaven that glows,Potect my child where'er he goes.The twilight hours, the day and night,Keep in the wood thy steps aright.Watch, minute, instant, as they flee,Shall all bring happiness to thee.
Celestials and the Titan brood
Protect thee in thy solitude,And haunt the mighty wood to blessThe wanderer in his hermit dress.

Fear not, by mightier guardians screened,
The giant or night-roving fiend;Nor let the cruel race who tearMan's flesh for food thy bosom scare.Far be the ape, the scorpion's sting,Fly, gnat, and worm, and creeping thing.Thee shall the hungry lion spare,The tiger, elephant, and bear:Safe, from their furious might repose,Safe from the horned buffaloes.Each savage thing the forests breed,That love on human flesh to feed,Shall for my child its rage abate,When thus its wrath I deprecate.Blest be thy ways: may sweet successThe valour of my darling bless.To all that Fortune can bestow,Go forth, my child, my Ráma, go.Go forth, O happy in the loveOf all the Gods below, above;And in those guardian powers confideThv paths who keep, thy steps who guide.May S'ukra, 
1b Yama, Sun, and Moon,
And He who gives each golden boon, 2b
Won by mine earnest pravers, be goodTo thee, my son, in Dandak wood.Fire, wind, and smoke, each text and spellFrom mouths of holy seers that fell,Guard Ráma when his limbs he dips,

Or with the stream makes pure his lips!
May the great saints and He, the LordWho made the worlds, by worlds adored,And every God in heaven besideMy banished Ráma keep and guide.
Thus with due praise the long-eyed dame,
Ennobled by her spotless fame,With wreaths of flowers and precious scentWorshipped the Gods, most reverent.A high-souled Br?man lit the fire,And offered, at the queen's desire,The holy oil ordained to burnFor Ráma's weal and safe return.Kaus'aly? best of dames, with careSet oil, wreaths, fuel, mustard, there.Then when the rites of fire had ceased,For Ráma's bliss and health, the priest,Standing without gave what remainedIn general offering, 
3b as ordained.
p. 125
Dealing among the twice-horn trainHoney, and curds, and oil, and grain,He bade each heart and voice uniteTo bless. the youthful anchorite.Then Ráma's mother, glorious dameBestowed, to meet the Bráhman's claim,

A lordly fee for duty done:
And thus again addressed her son:
'Such blessings as the Gods o'erjoyed
Poured forth, when Vritra  1 was destroyed,
On Indra of the thousand eyes,Attend, my child, thine enterprise!Yea, such as Vinatá once gaveTo King Suparna  
2 swift and brave,
Who sought the drink that cheers the skies,Attend, my child, thine enterprise!Yea, such as, when the Amrit rose,  
3
And Indra slew his Daitya foes,The royal Aditi bestowedOn Him whose hand with slaughter glowedOf that dire brood of monstrous size,Attend, my child, thine enterprise!E'en such as peerless Vishnu graced,When with his triple step he paced,Outbursting from the dwarf's disguise,  
4
Attend, my child, thine enterprise!Floods, isles, and seasons as they fly,Worlds, Vedas, quarters of the sky,Combine, O mighty-armed, to blessThee destined heir of happiness!'
The long-eyed lady ceased: she shed
Pure scent and grain upon his head.And that prized herb whose sovereign power

Preserves from dark misfortune's hour,
Upon the hero's arm she set,To be his faithful amulet.While holy tunes she murmured low,Aud spoke glad words though crushed by woe,Concealing with obedient tongueThe pangs with which her heart was wrung.She bent,she kissed his brow, she pressedHer darling to her troubled breast:'Firm in thy purpose, go,' she cried,'Go Ráma, and my bliss betide.Attain returning safe and well,Triumphant in Ayodhyá, dwell.Then shall my happy eyes beholdThe empire by thy will controlled.Then grief and care shall leave no trace,Joy shall light up thy mother's face,And I shall see my darling reign,In moonlike glory come again.These eyes shall fondly gaze on theeSo faithful to thy sire's decree,
When thou the forest wild shalt quit
On thine ancestral throne to sit.Yea, thou shalt turn from exile back,Nor choicest blessings ever lack,Then fill with rapture ever newMy bosom and thy consort's too.   To S'iva and the heavenly host

     My worship has been paid,
   To mighty saint, to godlike ghost,     To every wandering shade.   Forth to the forest thou wilt hie,     Therein to dwell so long:   Let all the quarters of the sky     Protect my child from wrong.'   Her blessings thus the queen bestowed;     Then round him fondly paced,   And often, while her eyes o'erflowed,     Her dearest son embraced.   Kaus'alyá's honoured feet he pressed,     As round her steps she bent,   And radiant with her prayers that blessed,     To Sitá's home he went.
       * * * * *
Footnotes
124:1 See p. 41.
124:2 The first progeny of Brahm? or Brahm? himself.
124:3 These are three names of the Sun.

124:4 See p. 1.
124:5 The saints who form the constellation of Ursa 
Major.
124:1b The regent of the planert Venus.
124:2b Kuvera.
124:3b Bali, or the presentation of food to all created beings, is one of the five great sacraments of the Hindu 
religion: it consists in throwing a small parcel of the offering, Ghee, or rice, or the like, into the open air at the back of the house.
125:1 In mythology, a demon slain by Indra.
125:2 Called also Garud, the King of the birds, 
offspring of Vinatá. See p. 53.
125:3 See p. 56.
125:4 See p. 43.
Next: Canto XXVI.: Alone With Sitá

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVI.: ALONE WITH SITÁ
So Ráma, to his purpose true,
To Queen Kaus'alyá bade adieu,Received the benison she gave,And to the path of duty clave.As through the crowded street he passed,A radiance on the way he cast,And each fair grace, by all approved,The bosoms of the people moved.
Now of the woeful change no word
The fair Videhan bride had heard;The thought of that imperial riteStill filled her bosom with delight.With grateful heart and joyful thoughtThe Gods in worship she had sought,And, well in royal duties learned,Sat longing till her lord returned,Not all unmarked by grief and shameWithin his sumptuous home he came,And hurried through the happy crowdWith eye dejected, gloomy-browed.Up Sitá sprang, and every limbTrembled with fear at sight of him.She marked that cheek where anguish fed,

Those senses care-disquieted.
For, when he looked on her, no moreCould his heart hide the load it bore,Nor could the pious chief controlThe paleness o'er his cheek that stole.His altered cheer, his brow bedewedWith clammy drops, his grief she viewed,And cried, consumed with fires of woe.'What, O my lord, has changed thee so?
p. 126
Vrihaspati looks down benign,And the moon rests in Pushya's sign,As Bráhmans sage this day declare:Then whence, my lord, this grief and care?Why does no canopy, like foamFor its white beauty, shade thee home,Its hundred ribs spread wide to throwSplendour on thy fair head below?Where are the royal fans, to graceThe lotus beauty of thy face,Fair as the moon or wild-swan's wing,And waving round the new-made king?Why do no sweet-toned bards rejoiceTo hail thee with triumphant voice?No tuneful heralds love to raiseLoud music in their monarch's praise?Why do no Bráhmans, Scripture-read,

Pour curds and honey on thy head,
Anointed, as the laws ordain,With holy rites, supreme to reign?Where are the chiefs of every guild?Where are the myriads should have filledThe streets, and followed home their kingWith merry noise and triumphing?Why does no gold-wrought chariot leadWith four brave horses, best for speed?No elephant precede the crowdLike a huge hill or thunder cloud,Marked from his birth for happy fate,Whom signs auspicious decorate?Why does no henchman, young and fair,Precede thee, and delight to bearEntrusted to his reverent holdThe burthen of thy throne of gold?Why, if the consecrating riteBe ready, why this mournful plight?Why do I see this sudden change,This altered mien so sad and strange?'
To her, as thus she weeping cried,
Raghu's illustrious son replied:
'Sítá, my honoured sire's decree
Commands me to the woods to flee.O high-born lady, nobly bredIn the good paths thy footsteps tread,

Hear, Janak's daughter, while I tell
The story as it all befell.Of old my father true and braveTwo boons to Queen Kaikeyí gave.Through these the preparations madeFor me today by her are stayed,For he is bound to disallowThis promise by that earlier vow.In Dandak forest wild and vastMust fourteen years by me be passed.My father's will makes Bharat heir,The kingdom and the throne to share.Now, ere the lonely wild I seek,I come once more with thee to speak.In Bharat's presence, O my dame,Ne'er speak with pride of Ráma's name:Another's eulogy to hearIs hateful to a monarch's ear.Thou must with love his rule obeyTo whom my father yields the sway.With love and sweet observance learnHis grace, and more the king's, to earn.Now, that my father may not breakThe words of promise that he spake,To the drear wood my steps are bent:Be firm, good Sítá, and content.Through all that time, my blameless spouse,Keep well thy fasts and holy vows,Rise from thy bed at break of day,

And to the Gods due worship pay.
With meek and lowly love revereThe lord of men, my father dear,And reverence to Kaus'alyá show,My mother, worn with eld and woe:By duty's law, O best of dames,High worship from thy love she claims,Nor to the other queens refuseObservance, rendering each her dues:By love and fond attention shownThey are my mothers like mine own.Let Bharat and S'atrughna bearIn thy sweet love a special share:Dear as my life, O let them beLike brother and like son to thee.In every word and deed refrainFrom aught that Bharat's soul may pain:He is Ayodhyá's king and mine,The head and lord of all our line.For those who serve and love them muchWith weariless endeavour, touchAnd win the gracious hearts of kings.While wrath from disobedience springs.Great monarchs from their presence sendTheir lawful sons who still offend,And welcome to the vacant placeGood children of an alien race.Then, best of women, rest thou here,And Bharat's will with love revere.

Obedient to thy king remain,
And still thy vows of truth maintain.   To the wide wood my steps I bend:      Make thou thy dwelling here;   See that thy conduct ne'er offend,      And keep my words, my dear.'
Next: Canto XXVII.: Sítá's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVII.: SÍTÁ'S SPEECH.
His sweetly-speaking bride, who best
Deserved her lord, he thus addressed.Then tender love bade passion wake,And thus the fair Videhan spake:'What words are these that thou hast said?Contempt of me the thought has bred.O best of heroes, I dismissWith bitter scorn a speech like this:
p. 127
Unworthy of a warrior's fameIt taints a monarch's son with shame,Ne'er to be heard from those who knowThe science of the sword and bow.My lord, the mother, sire, and son,Receive their lots by merit won;The brother and the daughter findThe portions to their deeds aligned.The wife alone, whate'er await,Must share on earth her husband's fate.So now the king's command which sendsThee to the wild, to me extends.The wife can find no refuge, none,

In father, mother, self, or son:
Both here, and when they vanish hence,Her husband is her sole defence.If, Raghu's son, thy steps are ledWhere Dandak's pathless wilds are spread,My foot before thine own shall passThrough tangled thorn and matted grass.Dismiss thine anger and thy doubt:Like refuse water cast them out,And lead me, O my hero, hence--I know not sin--with confidence.Whate'er his lot,'tis far more sweetTo follow still a husband's feetThan in rich palaces to lie,Or roam at pleasure through the sky.My mother and my sire have taughtWhat duty bids, and trained each thought,Nor have I now mine ear to turnThe duties of a wife to learn,I'll seek with thee the woodland dellAnd pathless wild where no men dwell,Where tribes of silvan creatures roam,And many a tiger makes his home.My life shall pass as pleasant thereAs in my father's palace fair.The worlds shall wake no care in me;My only care be truth to thee.There while thy wish I still obey,True to my vows with thee I'll stray,

And there shall blissful hours be spent
In woods with honey redolent.In forest shades thy mighty armWould keep a stranger's life from harm,And how shall Sitá think of fearWhen thou, O glorious lord, art near?Heir of high bliss, my choice is made,Nor can I from my will be stayed.Doubt not; the earth will yield me roots,These will I eat, and woodland fruits;And as with thee I wander thereI will not bring thee grief or care.I long, when thou, wise lord, art nigh,All fearless, with delighted eyeTo gaze upon the rocky hill,The lake, the fountain, and the hill;To sport with thee, my limbs to cool,In some pure lily-covered pool,While the white swan's and mallard's wings
Are plashing in the water-springs.
So would a thousand seasons fleeLike one sweet day, if spent with thee.Without my lord I would not prizeA home with Gods above the skies:Without my lord, my life to bless,Where could be heaven or happiness?   Forbid me not: with thee I go     The tangled wood to tread.

   There will I live with thee, as though
     This roof were o'er my head.   My will for thine shall be resigned;     Thy feet my steps shall guide.   Thou, only thou, art in my mind:     I heed not all beside.   Thy heart shall ne'er by me be grieved;     Do not my prayer deny:   Take me, dear lord; of thee bereaved     Thy Sitá swears to die.'   These words the duteous lady spake,     Nor would he yet consent   His faithful wife with him to take     To share his banishment.   He soothed her with his gentle speech;     To change her will he strove:   And much he said the woes to teach     Of those in wilds who rove.
Next: Canto XXVIII.: The Dangers of The Wood.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVIII.: THE DANGERS OF THE 
WOOD.
Thus Sitá spake, and he who knew
His duty, to its orders true,Was still reluctant as the woesOf forest life before him rose.He sought to soothe her grief, to dryThe torrent from each brimming eye,And then, her firm resolve to shake,These words to pious hero spake:   'O daughter of a noble line,Whose steps from virtue ne'er decline,Remain, thy duties here pursue,As my fond heart would have thee do.Now hear me, Sitá, fair and weak,And do the words that I shall speak.Attend and hear while I explainEach danger in the wood, each pain.Thy lips have spoken: I condemnThe foolish words that fell from them.This senseless plan, this wish of thineTo live a forest life, resign.The names of trouble and distressSuit well the tangled wilderness.

In the wild wood no joy I know,
A forest life is nought but woe.The lion in his moutain caveAnswers the torrents as they rave,And forth his voice of terror throws:The wood, my love, is full of woes.
p. 128
There mighty monsters fearless play,And in their maddened onset slayThe hapless wretch who near them goes:The wood, my love, is full of woes.'Tis hard to ford each treacherous flood,So thick with crocodiles and mud,Where the wild elephants repose:The wood, my love, is full of woes.Or far from streams the wanderer straysThrough thorns and creeper-tangled ways,While round him many a wild-cock crows:The wood, my love, is full of woes.On 'the cold ground upon a heapOn gathered leaves condemned to sleep,Toil-wearied, will his eyelids close:The wood, my love, is full of woes.Long days and nights must he contentHis soul with scanty aliment,What fruit the wind from branches blows:The wood, my love, is full of woes.

O Sitá, while his strength may last,
The ascetic in the wood must fast,Coil on his head his matted hair,And bark must be his only wear.To Gods and spirits day by dayThe ordered worship he must pay,And honour with respectful careEach wandering guest who meets him there.The bathing rites he ne'er must shunAt dawn, at noon, at set of sun,Obedient to the law he knows:The wood, my love, is full of woes.To grace the altar must be broughtThe gift of flowers his hands have sought--The debt each pious hermit owes:The wood, my love, is full of woes.The devotee must be contentTo live, severely abstinent,On what the chance of fortune shows:The wood, my love, is full of woes.Hunger afflicts him evermore:The nights are black, the wild winds roar;And there are dangers worse than those:The wood, my love, is full of woes.There creeping things in every formInfest the earth, the serpents swarm,And each proud eye with fury glows:The wood, my love, is full of woes.The snakes that by the river hide

In sinuous course like rivers glide,
And line the path with deadly foes:The wood, my love, is full of woes.Scorpions, and grasshoppers, and fliesDisturb the wanderer as he lies,And wake him from his troubled doze:The wood, my love, is full of woes.Trees, thorny bushes, intertwined,Their branched ends together bind,And dense with grass the thicket grows:The wood, my dear, is full of woes,With many ills the flesh is tried,When these and countless fears besideVex those who in the wood remain:The wilds are naught but grief and pain.Hope, anger must be cast aside,To penance every thought applied:No fear must be of things to fear:Hence is the wood for ever drear.Enough, my love: thy purpose quit:For forest life thou art not fit.As thus I think on all, I seeThe wild wood is no place for thee.'
Next: Canto XXIX.: Sítá's Appeal.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIX.: SÍTÁ'S APPEAL.
Thus Ráma spake. Her lord's address
The lady heard with deep distress.And, as the tear bedimmed her eye,In soft low accents made reply:'The perils of the wood, and allThe woes thou countest to appal,Led by my love I deem not pain;Each woe a charm, each loss a gain,Tiger, and elephant, and deer,Bull, lion, buffalo, in fear,Soon as thy matchless form they see,With every silvan beast will flee.With thee, O Ráma, I must go:My sire's command ordains it so.Bereft of thee, my lonely heartMust break, and life and I must part.While thou, O mighty lord, art nigh,Not even He who rules the sky,Though He is strongest of the strong,With all his might can do me wrong.Nor can a lonely woman leftBy her dear husband live bereft.In my great love, my lord, I ween,The truth of this thou mayst have seen.

In my sire's palace long ago
I heard the chief of those who know,The truth-declaring Bráhmans, tellMy fortune, in the wood to dwell.I heard their promise who divineThe future by each mark and sign,And from that hour have longed to leadThe forest life their lips decreed.Now, mighty Ráma, I must shareThy father's doom which sends thee there;In this I will not be denied,But follow, love, where thou shalt guide.O husband, I will go with thee,Obedient to that high decree,Now let the Bráhmans' words be true,For this the time they had in view.I know full well the wood has woes;But they disturb the lives of thoseWho in the forest dwell, nor holdTheir rebel senses well controlled.
p. 129
In my sire's halls, ere I was wed,I heard a dame who begged her breadBefore my mother's face relateWhat griefs a forest life await.And many a time in sport I prayedTo seek with thee the greenwood shade,

For O, my heart on this is set,
To follow thee, dear anchoret.May blessings on thy life attend:I long with thee my steps to bend,For with such hero as thou artThis pilgrimage enchants my heart.Still close, my lord, to thy dear sideMy spirit will be purified:Love from all sin my soul will free:My husband is a God to me.So, love, with thee shall I have blissAnd share the life that follows this.I heard a Brahman, dear to fame,This ancient Scripture text proclaim:'The woman whom on earth belowHer parents on a man bestow,And lawfully their hands uniteWith water and each holy rite,She in this world shall be his wife,His also in the after life.'Then tell me, O beloved, whyThou wilt this earnest prayer deny,Nor take me with thee to the wood,Thine own dear wife so true and good.But if thou wilt not take me thereThus grieving in my wild despair,To fire or water I will fly,Or to the poisoned draught, and die.'So thus to share his exile, she

Besought him with each earnest plea,
Nor could she yet her lord persuadeTo take her to the lonely shade.The answer of the strong-armed chiefSmote the Videhan's soul with grief,And from her eyes the torrents camebathing the bosom of the dame.
Next: Canto XXX.: The Triumph of Love.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXX.: THE TRIUMPH OF LOVE.
The daughter of Videha's king,
While Ráma strove to soothe the stingOf her deep anguish, thus beganOnce more in furtherance of her plan:And with her spirit sorely triedBy fear and anger, love and pride,With keenly taunting words addressedHer hero of the stately breast:'Why did the king my sire, who reignsO'er fair Videha's wide domains,Hail Ráma son with joy unwise,A woman in a man's disguise?Now falsely would the people say,By idle fancies led astray,That Ráma's own are power and might,As glorious as the Lord of Light.Why sinkest thou in such dismay?What fears upon thy spirit weigh,That thou, O Ráma, fain wouldst fleeFrom her who thinks of naught but thee?To thy dear will am I resignedIn heart and body, soul and mind,As Sávitri gave all to one,Satyaván, Dyumatsena's son.  
1

Not e'en in fancy can I brook
To any guard save thee to look:Let meaner wives their houses shame,To go with thee is all my claim.Like some low actor, deemst thou fitThy wife to others to commit--Thine own, espoused in maiden youth,Thy wife so long, unblamed for truth?Do thou, my lord, his will obeyFor whom thou losest royal sway,To whom thou wouldst thy wife confide--Not me, but thee, his wish may guide.Thou must not here thy wife forsake,And to the wood thy journey make,Whether stern penance, grief, and care,Or rule or heaven await thee there.Nor shall fatigue my limbs distressWhen wandering in the wilderness:Each path which near to thee I treadShall seem a soft luxurious bed.The reeds, the bushes where I pass,The thorny trees, the tangled grassShall feel, if only thou be near,Soft to my touch as skins of deer.When the rude wind in fury blows,And scattered dust upon me throws,That dust, beloved lord, to meShall as the precious sandal be.And what shall be more blest than I,

When gazing on the wood I lie
In some green glade upon a bedWith sacred grass beneath us spread?The root, the leaf, the fruit which thouShalt give me from the earth or bough,Scanty or plentiful, to eat,Shall taste to me as Amrit sweet.As there I live on flowers and rootsAnd every season's kindly fruits,I will not for my mother grieve,My sire, my home, or all I leave.My presence, love, shall never addOne pain to make the heart more sad;
p. 130
I will not cause thee grief or care,Nor be a burden hard to bear.With thee is heaven, where'er the spot;Each place is hell where thou art not.Then go with me, O Ráma; thisIs all my hope and all my bliss.If thou wilt leave thy wife who stillEntreats thee with undaunted will,This very day shall poison closeThe life that spurns the rule of foes.How, after, can my soul sustainThe bitter life of endless pain,When thy dear face, my lord, I miss!

No, death is better far than this.
Not for an hour could I endureThe deadly grief that knows not cure,Far less a woe I could not shunFor ten long years, and three, and one.'
While fires of woe consumed her, such
Her sad appeal, lamenting much;Then with a wild cry, anguish-wrung,About her husband's neck she clung.Like some she-elephant who bleedsStruck by the hunter's venomed reeds,So in her quivering heart she feltThe many wounds his speeches dealt.Then, as the spark from wood is gained,  
1
Down rolled the tear so long restrained:The crystal moisture, sprung from woe,From her sweet eyes began to flow,As runs the water from a pairOf lotuses divinely fair.And Sítá's face with long dark eyes,Pure as the moon of autumn skies,Faded with weeping, as the budsOf lotuses when sink the floods.Around his wife his arms he strained,Who senseless from her woe remained,And with sweet words, that bade her wakeTo life again, the hero spake:'I would not with thy woe, my Queen,

Buy heaven and all its blissful sheen.
Void of all fear am I as He,The self-existent God, can be.I knew not all thy heart till now,Dear lady of the lovely browSo wished not thee in woods to dwell;Yet there mine arm can guard thee well.Now surely thou, dear love, wast madeTo dwell with me in green wood shade.And, as a high saint's tender mindClings to its love for all mankind,So I to thee will ever cling,Sweet daughter of Videha's king.The good, of old, O soft of frame,Honoured this duty's sovereign claim,And I its guidance will not shun,True as light's Queen is to the Sun.
I cannot, pride of Janak's line,
This journey to the wood decline:My sire's behest, the oath he sware,The claims of truth, all lead me there.One duty, dear the same for aye,Is sire and mother to obey:Should I their orders once transgressMy very life were weariness.If glad obedience be deniedTo father, mother, holy guide,What rites, what service can be done

That stern Fate's favour may be won?
These three the triple world comprise,O darling of the lovely eyes.Earth has no holy thing like theseWhom with all love men seek to please.Not truth, or gift, or bended knee,Not honour, worship, lordly fee,Storms heaven and wins a blessing thenceLike sonly love and reverence.Heaven, riches, grain, and varied lore,With sons and many a blessing more,All these are made their own with easeBy those their elders' souls who please.The mighty-souled, who ne'er forget,Devoted sons, their filial debt,Win worlds where Gods and minstrels are,And Brahmá's sphere more glorious far.Now as the orders of my sire,Who keeps the way of truth, require,So will I do, for such the wayOf duty that endures for aye:To take thee, love, to Dandak's wildMy heart at length is reconciled,For thee such earnest thoughts impelTo follow, and with me to dwell.O faultless form from feet to brows,Come with me, as my will allows,And duty there with me pursue,Trembler, whose bright eyes thrill me through.

In all thy days, come good come ill,
Preserve unchanged such noble will,And thou, dear love, wilt ever beThe glory of thy house and me.Now, beauteous-armed, begin the tasksThe woodland life of hermits asks.For me the joys of heaven aboveHave charms no more without thee, love.And now, dear Sítá, be not slow:Food on good mendicants bestow,And for the holy Bráhmans bringThy treasures and each precious thing.Thy best attire and gems collect,The jewels which thy beauty decked,And every ornament and toyPrepared for hours of sport and joy:The beds, the cars wherein I ride,Among our followers, next, divide.'
She conscious that her lord approved
Her going, with great rapture moved,
p. 131
Hastened within, without delay,Prepared to give their wealth away.

Footnotes
129:1 The story of Savitri, told in the Mahábhárat, has 
been admirably translated by Rückert, and elegantly 
epitomized by Mrs. Manning in India, Ancient and Mediaeval. There is a free rendering of the story in Idylls from the Sanskrit.
130:1 Fire for sacrificial purposes is produced by the 
attrition of two pieces of wood.
Next: Canto XXXI.: Lakshman's Prayer.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXI.: LAKSHMAN'S PRAYER.
When Lakshman, who had joined them there,
Had heard the converse of the pair,His mien was changed, his eyes o'erflowed,His breast no more could bear its load.The son of Raghu, sore distressed,His brother's feet with fervour pressed,While thus to Sita he complained.And him by lofty vows enchained:'If thou wilt make the woods thy home,Where elephant and roebuck roam,I too this day will take my bowAnd in the path before thee go.Our way will lie through forest groundWhere countless birds and beasts are found,I heed not homes of Gods on high,I heed not life that cannot die,Nor would I wish, with thee away,O'er the three worlds to stretch my sway.'
Thus Lakshman spake, with earnest prayer
His brother's woodland life to share.As Rama still his prayer deniedWith soothing words, again he cried:'When leave at first thou didst accord,

Why dost thou stay me now, my lord?
Thou art my refuge: O, be kind,Leave me not, dear my lord, behind.Thou canst not, brother, if thou chooseThat I still live, my wish refuse.'
The glorious chief his speech renewed
To faithful Lakshman as he sued,And on the eyes of Ráma gazedLonging to load, with hands upraised:'Thou art a hero just and dear,Whose steps to virtue's path adhere,Loved as my life till life shall end.My faithful brother and my friend.If to the woods thou take thy wayWith Sítá and with me to-day,Who for Kaus'alyá will provide,And guard the good Sumitra's side?The lord of earth, of mighty power,Who sends good things in plenteous shower,As Indra pours the grateful rain,A captive lies in passion's chain.The power imperial for her sonHas As'vapati's daughter  
1 won,
And she, proud queen, will little heedHer miserable rivals' need.
So Bharat, ruler of the land,
By Queen Kaikeyí's side will stand,

Nor of those two will ever think.
While grieving in despair they sink.Now, Lakshman, as thy love decrees,Or else the monarch's heart to please,Follow this counsel and protectMy honoured mother from neglect.So thou, while not to me aloneThy great affection will be shown,To highest duty wilt adhereBy serving those thou shouldst revere.Now, son of Raghu, for my sakeObey this one request I make,Or, of her darling son bereft,Kausaly'á has no comfort left.'
The faithful Lakshman, thus addressed
In gentle words which love expressed,To him in lore of language learned,His answer, eloquent, returned:'Nay, through thy might each queen will shareAttentive Bharat's love and care.Should Bharat, raised as king to swayThis noblest realm, his trust betray,Nor for their safety well provide,Seduced by ill-suggesting pride,Doubt not my vengeful hand shall killThe cruel wretch who counsels ill--Kill him and all who lend him aid,And the three worlds in league arrayed.

And good Kausaly'á well can fee
A thousand champions like to me.A thousand hamlets rich in grainThe station of that queen maintain.She may, and my dear mother too,Live on the ample revenue.Then let me follow thee: hereinIs naught that may resemble sin.So shall I in my wish suceed,And aid, perhaps, my brother's need.My bow and quiver well suppliedWith arrows hanging at my side,My hands shall spade and basket bear,And for thy feet the way prepare.I'll bring thee roots and berries sweet.And woodland fare which hermits eat.Thou shall with thy Videhan spouseRecline upon the mountain's brows:Be mine the toil, be mine to keepWatch o'er thee waking or asleep.'
Filled by his speech with joy and pride
Ráma to Lakshman thus replied:'Go then, my brother, bid adieuTo all thy friends and retinue.And those two bows of fearful might,Celestial, which, at that famed rite,Lord Varun gave to Janak, kingOf fair Videha with thee bring,

With heavenly coats of sword-proof mail,
Quivers, whose arrows never fail,
p. 132
And golden-hilted swords so keen,The rivals of the sun in sheen.Tended with care these arms are allPreserved in my preceptor's hall.With speed, O Lakshman, go, produce,And bring them hither for our use.'So on a woodland life intent,To see his faithful friends he went,And brought the heavenly arms which layBy Ráma's teacher stored away,And Raghu's son to Ráma showedThose wondrous arms which gleamed and glowed,Well kept, adorned with many a wreathOf flowers on case, and hilt, and sheath.The prudent Ráma at the sightAddressed his brother with delight:'Well art thou come, my brother dear.For much I longed to see thee here.For with thine aid, before I go,I would my gold and wealth bestowUpon the Bráhmans sage, who schoolTheir lives by stern devotion's rule.And for all those who ever dwellWithin my house and serve me well,

Devoted servants, true and good,
Will I provide a livelihood.   Quick, go and summon to this place     The good Vas'ishtha's son,   Suyajna, of the Bráhman race     The first and holiest one.   To all the Bráhmans wise and good     Will I due reverence pay,   Then to the solitary wood     With thee will take my way.'
Footnotes
131:1 Kaikeyi.
Next: Canto XXXII.: The Gift of The Treasures.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXII.: THE GIFT OF THE 
TREASURES.
That speech so noble which conveyed
His friendly wish, the chief obeyed.With steps made swift by anxious thoughtThe wise Suyajna's home he sought,Him in the hall of Fire  
1 he found.
And bent before him to the ground:'O friend, to Rama's house return,Who now performs a task most stern.'He, when his noonday rites were done.Went forth with fair Sumitra's son,And came to Ráma's bright abodeRich in the love which Lakshmi showed.The son of Raghu with his dame.With joined hands met him as he came,Showing to him who Scripture knewThe worship that is Agni's due.
With armlets, bracelets, collars, rings,
With costly pearls on golden strings,With many a gem for neck and limbThe son of Raghu honoured him.Then Ráma, at his wife's request,

The wise Suyajna thus addressed;
'Accept a necklace too to deckWith golden strings thy spouse's neck.And Sítá here, my friend, were gladA girdle to her gift to add.And many a bracelet wrought with care,And many an armlet rich and rare,My wife to thine is fain to give,Departing in the wood to live.A bed by skilful workmen made,With gold and various gems inlaid--This too, before she goes, would shePresent, O saintly friend, to thee.Thine be my elephant, so famed,My uncle's present. Victor named;And let a thousand coins of gold,Great Brahman, with the gift be told.'Thus Ráma spoke: nor he declinedThe noble gitts for him designed.On Ráma, Lakshman, Sítá heInvoked all high felicity.
In pleasant words then Ráma gave
His hest to Lakshman prompt and brave,As Brahmá speaks for Him to hearWho rules the Gods' celestial sphere:'To the two best of Bráhmans run;Agastya bring, and Kus'ik's son,And precious gifts upon them rain,

Like fostering floods upon the grain.
O long-armed Prince of Raghu's line,Delight them with a thousand kine,And many a fair and costly gem,With gold and silver, give to them.To him, so deep in Scripture, who,To Queen Kaus'alyá, ever true,Serves her with blessing and respect,Chief of the Taittiriya sect  
1b--
To him. with women-slaves, presentA chariot rich with ornament,And costly robes of silk beside,Until the sage be satisfied.On Chitraratha. true aud dear,My tuneful bard and charioteer,Gems, robes, and plenteous wealth confer--Mine ancient friend and minister.And these who go with staff in hand,Grammarians trained, a numerous band.Who their deep study only prize,Nor think of other exercise,Who toil not, loving dainty fare,Whose praises e'en the good declare--On these be eighty cars bestowed,And each with precious treasures load.
p. 133
A thousand bulls for them suffice,

Two hundred elephants of price,
And let a thousand kine besideThe dainties of each meal provide.The throng who sacred girdles wear,And on Káusalyá wait with care--A thousand golden coins shall please,Son of Sumitrá, each of these.Let all, dear Lakshman, of the trainThese special gifts of honour gain;My mother will rejoice to knowHer Bráhmans have been cherished so.'
Then Raghu's son addressed the crowd
Who round him stood and wept aloud,When he to all who thronged the courtHad dealt his wealth for their support:'In Lakshman's house and mine remain,And guard them till I come again,'To all his people sad with grief.In loving ords thus spoke their chief,Then bade his treasure-keeper bringGold, silver, and each precious thing.Then straight the servants went and boreBack to their chief the wealth in store,Before the people's eyes it shone,A glorious pile to look upon.The prince of men with Lakshman's aidParted the treasuures there displaved,Gave to the poor, the young, the old,

And twice-born men, the gems and gold.
   A Bráhman, long in evil case.Named Trijat, born of Garga's race,Earned ever toiling in a woodWith spade and plough his livelihood.The youthful wife, his babes who bore,Their indigence felt more and more.Thus to the aged man she spake:'Hear this my word: my counsel take.Come, throw thy spade and plough away;To virtuous Ráma go to-day.And somewhat of his kindness pray.'   He heard the word she spoke: aroundHis limbs his ragged cloth he wound.And took his journey by the roadThat led to Ráma's fair abode.To the fifth court be made his way;Nor met the Bráhman check or stay.Brighu, Angiras 
1 could not be
Brighter with saintly light than Vie,To Ráma's presence on he pressed.And thus the noble chief addressed:'O Ráma, poor and weak am I,And many children round me cry.Scant living in the woods I earn:On me thine eye of pity turn.'And Ráma, bent on sport and jest,The suppliant Bráhman thus addressed:

'O aged man, one thousand kine,
Yet undistributed, are mine.The cows on thee will I bestowAs far as thou thy staff canst throw.   The Bráhman heard. In eager hasteHe bound his cloth around his waist.Then round his head his staff he whirled,And forth with mightiest effort hurled.Cast from his hand it flew, and sankTo earth on Sarjú's farther bank,Where herds of kine in thousands fedNear to the well-stocked bullock shed.And all the cows that wandered o'erThe meadow, far as Sarjú's shore.At Ráma's word the herdsmen droveTo Trijat's cottage in the grove.He drew the Bráhman to his breast,And thus with calming words addressed:'Now be not angry, Sire. I pray:This jest of mine was meant in play.These thousand kine, but not alone.Their herdsmen too, are all thine own.And wealth beside I give thee: speak.Thine shall be all thy heart can seek.'   Thus Ráma spake. And Trijat prayedFor means his sacrifice to aid.And Rama gave much wealth, requiredTo speed his offering as desired.

Footnotes
132:1 The chapel where the sacred fire used in worship 
is kept.
132:1b The students and teachers of the Taittiríya portion of the Yajur Veda.
133:1 Two of the divine persaonnges called prejápatis and *Brahmadikas* who were first created by Brahmá.
Next: Canto XXXIII.: The People's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIII.: THE PEOPLE'S LAMENT.
Thus Sitá and the princes brave
Much wealth to all the Bráhmans gaveThen to the monarch's house the threeWent forth the aged king to see.The princes from two servants tookThose heavenly arms of glorious look,Adorned with garland and with bandBy Sitá's beautifying hand.On each high house a mournful throngHad gathered ere they passed along,Who gzed in pure unselfish woeFrom turret, root, and portico.So dense the crowd that blocked the ways,The rest, unable there to gaze,Were fain each terrace to ascend.And thence their eyes on Ráma bend.Then as the gathered multitudeOn foot their well-loved Ráma viewed.No royal shade to screen his head.Such words, disturbed in grief they said:'O look, our hero, wont to rideLeading a host in perfect pride--Now Lakshman, sole of all his friends,With Sitá on his steps attends.

Though he has known the sweets of power,
And poured his gifts in liberal shower,From duty's path he will not swerve,
p. 134
But, still his father's truth preserve.And she whose form so soft and fairWas veiled from spirits of the air,Now walks unsheltered from the day,Seen by the crowds who throng the way.Ah, for that gently-nurtured form!How will it fade with sun and storm!How will the rain, the cold, the heatMar fragrant breast and tinted feet!Surely some demon has possessedHis sire, and speaks within his breast,Or how could one that is a kingThus send his dear son wandering?It were a deed unkindly doneTo banish e'en a worthless son:But what, when his pure life has gainedThe hearts of all, by love enchained?Six sovereign virtues join to graceRáma the foremost of his race:Tender and kind and pure is he,Docile, religious, passion-free.Hence misery strikes not him alone:In bitterest grief the people moan,

Like creatures of the stream, when dry
In the great heat the channels lie.The world is mournful with the griefThat falls on its beloved chief,As, when the root is hewn away,Tree, fruit, and flower, and bud decay.The soul of duty, bright to see,He is the root of you and me;And all of us, who share his grief,His branches, blossom, fruit, and leaf.Now like the faithful Lakshman, weWill follow and be true as he;Our wives and kinsmen call with speed,And hasten where our lord shall lead.Yes, we will leave each well-loved spot,The field, the garden, and the cot,And, sharers of his weal and woe,Behind the pious Ráma go.Our houses, empty of their stores,With ruined courts and broken doors,With all their treasures borne away.And gear that made them bright and gay:O'errun by rats, with dust o'erspread,Shrines, whence the deities have fled,Where not a hand the water pours,Or sweeps the long-neglected floors,No incense loads the evening air,No Bráhmans chant the text and prayer,No fire of sacrifice is bright,

No gift is known, no sacred rite;
With floors which broken vessels strew,As if our woes had crushed them too--Of these be stern Kaikeyí queen,And rule o'er homes where we have been.The wood where Ráma's feet may roamShall be our city and our home,And this fair city we forsake,Our flight a wilderness shall make.Each serpent from his hole shall hie,The birds and beasts from mountain fly,Lions and elephants in fearShall quit the woods when we come near,Yield the broad wilds for us to range,And take our city in exchange.With Ráma will we hence, contentIf, where he is, our days be spent.'
Such were the varied words the crowd
Of all conditions spoke aloud.And Ráma heard their speeches, yetChanged not his purpose firmly set.His father's palace soon he neared,That like Kailása's hill appeared.Like a wild elephant he strodeRight onward to the bright abode.Within the palace court he stepped,Where ordered bands their station kept,And saw Sumantra standing near

With down-cast eye and gloomy cheer.
Next: Canto XXXIV.: Ráma In The Palace.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIV.: RÁMA IN THE PALACE.
The dark incomparable chief
Whose eye was like a lotus leaf,Cried to the mournful charioteer,'Go tell my sire that I am here.'
   Sumantra, sad and all dismayed,
The chieftain's order swift obeyed.Within the palace doors he hiedAnd saw the king, who wept and sighed.Like the great sun when wrapped in shadeLike fire by ashes overlaid,Or like a pool with waters dried,So lay the world's great lord and pride,A while the wise Sumantra gazedOn him whose senses woe has dazed,Grieving for Ráma. Near he drewWith hands upraised in reverence due.With blessing first his king he hailed;Then with a voice that well-nigh failed,In trembling accents soft and lowAddressed the monarch in his woe:'The prince of men, thy Ráma, waitsBefore thee at the palace gates.His wealth to Bráhmans he has dealt,

And all whom in his home have dwelt.
Admit thy son. His friends have heardHis kind farewell and parting word,He longs to see thee first, and thenWill seek the wilds, O King of men.He, with each princely virtue's blaze,Shines as the sun engirt by rays.'
The truthful King who loved to keep
The law profound as Ocean's deep,And stainless as the dark blue sky,Thus to Sumantra made reply:
p. 135
'Go then, Sumantra, go and callMy wives and ladies one and all.Drawn round me shall they fill the placeWhen I behold my Ráma's face.'
   Quick to the inner rooms he sped,
And thus to all the women said,'Come, at the summons of the king:Come all, and make no tarrying.'
   Their husband's word, by him conveyed,
Soon as they heard, the dames obeyed,And following his guidance allCame thronging to the regal hall.

ln number half seven hundred, they,
All lovely dames, in long array,With their bright eyes for weeping red,To stand round Queen Kaus'alyá, sped.They gathered, and the monarch viewedOne moment all the multitude,Then to Sumantra spoke and said:'Now let my son be hither led.'
   Sumantra went. Then Ráma came,
And Lakshman, and the Maithil dame,And, as he led them on, their guideStraight to the monarch's presence hied.When yet far off the father sawHis son with raised palms toward him draw,Girt by his ladies, sick with woes,Swift from his royal seat he rose.With all his strength the aged manTo meet his darling Ráma ran,But trembling, wild with dark despair,Fell on the ground and fainted there.And Lakshman, wont in cars to ride,And Ráma, threw them by the sideOf the poor miserable king,Half lifeless with his sorrow's sting.Throughout the spacious hall up wentA thousand women's wild lament:'Ah Ráma!' thus they wailed and wept,And anklets tinkled as they stepped.

Around his body, weeping, threw
Their loving arms the brothers two,And then, with Sitá's gentle aid,The king upon a couch was laid.At length to earth's imperial lord,When life and knowledge were restored,Though seas of woe went o'er his head,With suppliant hand, thus Ráma said:'Lord ot us all, great King, thou art:Bid me farewell before we part,To Dandak wood this day I go:One blessing and one look bestow.Let Lakshman my companion be,And Sítá also follow me.With truthful pleas I sought to bendTheir purpose; but no ear they lend.Now cast this sorrow from thy heart,And let us all, great King, depart.As Brahmá sends his children, soLet Lakshman, me, and Sítá go.'
He stood unmoved, and watched intent
Until the king should grant consent.Upon his son his eyes he cast,And thus the monarch spake at last:'O Ráma, by her arts enslaved,I gave the boons Kaikeyí craved,Unfit to reign, by her misled:Be ruler in thy father's stead.'

Thus by the lord of men addressed,
Ráma, of virtue's friends the best,In lore of language duly learned,His answer, reverent, thus returned:'A thousand years, O King, remainO'er this our city still to reign.I in the woods my life will lead:The lust of rule no more I heed.Nine years and five I there will spend,And when the portioned days shall end,Will come, my vows and exile o'er,And clasp thy feet, my King, once more.'
A captive in the snare of truth,
Weeping, distressed with woe and ruth,Thus spake the monarch, while the queenKaikeyí urged him on unseen:'Go then, O Ráma, and beginThy course unvext by fear and sin:Go, my beloved son, and earnSuccess, and joy, and safe return.So fast the bonds of duty bind.O Raghu's son, thy truthful mind,That naught can turn thee back, or guideThy will so strongly fortified.But 0, a little longer stay.Nor turn thy steps this night away,That I one little day--alas!

One only--with my son may pass.
Me and thy mother do not slight,But stay, my son, with me to-night;With every dainty please thy taste,And seek to-morrow morn the wasteHard is thy task, O Raghu's son,Dire is the toil thou wilt not shun,Far to the lonely wood to flee,And leave thy friends for love of me.I swear it by my truth, believe,For thee, my son, I deeply grieve,Misguided by the traitress dameWith hidden guile like smouldering flame.Now, by her wicked counsel stirred,Thou fain wouldst keep my plighted word.No marvel that my eldest bornWould hold me true when I have sworn.'
Then Ráma having calmly heard
His wretched father speak each word,With Lakshman standing br his sideThus, humbly, to the King replied:'If dainties now my taste regale,To-morrow must those dainties fail.This day departure I preferTo all that wealth can minister.O'er this fair land, no longer mine,Which I, with all her realms, resign,

p. 136
Her multitudes of men, her grain,
Her stores of wealth, let Bharat reign.And let the promised boon which thouWast pleased to grant the queen ere now,Be hers in full. Be true, O King,Kind giver of each precious thing.Thy spoken word I still will heed,Obeying all thy lips decreed:And fourteen years in woods will dwellWith those who live in glade and dell.No hopes of power my heart can touch,No selfish joys attract so muchAs son of Raghu, to fulfilWith heart and soul my father's will.Dismiss, dismiss thy needless woe,Nor let those drowning torrents flow:The Lord of Rivers in his prideKeeps to the banks that bar his tide.Here in thy presence I declare;By thy good deeds, thy truth, I swear;Nor lordship, joy, nor lands I prize;Life, heaven, all blessings I despise.I wish to see thee still remainMost true, O King, and free from stain.It must not, Sire, it must not be:I cannot rest one hour with thee.Then bring this sorrow to an end,

For naught my settled will can bend.
I gave a pledge that binds me too,And to that pledge I still am true.Kaikeyí bade me speed away:She prayed me, and I answered yea.Pine not for me, and weep no more;The wood for us has joy in store,Filled with the wild deer's peaceful herdsAnd voices of a thousand birds.A father is the God of each,Yea, e'en of Gods, so Scriptures teach:And I will keep my sire's decree,For as a God I honour thee.O best of men, the time is nigh,The fourteen years will soon pass byAnd to thine eyes thy son restore:Be comforted, and weep no more.Thou with thy firmness shouldst supportThese weeping crowds who throng the court;Then why, O chief of high renown,So troubled, and thy soul cast down?'
Next: Canto XXXV.: Kaikeyí Reproached.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXV.: KAIKEYÍ REPROACHED.
Wild with the rage he could not calm,
Sumantra, grinding palm on palm,His head in quick impatience shook,And sighed with woe he could not brook.He gnashed his teeth, his eyes were red,From his changed face the colour fled.In rage and grief that knew no law,The temper of the king he saw.With his word-arrows swift and keenHe shook the bosom of the queen.With scorn, as though its lightning strokeWould blast her body, thus he spoke:'Thou, who, of no dread sin afraid,Hast Das'aratha's self betrayed,Lord of the world, whose might sustainsEach thing that moves or fixed remains,What direr crime is left thee now?Death to thy lord and house art thou,Whose cruel deeds the king distress,Mahendra's peer in mightiness,Firm as the mountain's rooted steep,Enduring as the Ocean's deep.Despise not Das'aratha, heIs a kind lord and friend to thee.

A loving wife in worth outruns
The mother of ten million sons.Kings, when their sires have passed away,Succeed by birthright to the sway.Ikshváku's son still rules the state,Yet thou this rule wouldst violate.Yea, let thy son, Kaikeyí, reign,Let Bharat rule his sire's domain.Thy will, O Queen, shall none oppose:We all will go where Ráma goes.No Bráhman, scorning thee, will restWithin the realm thou governest,But all will fly indignant hence:So great thy trespass and offence.I marvel, when thy crime I see.Earth yawns not quick to swallow thee;And that the Bráhman saints prepareNo burning scourge thy soul to scare,With cries of shame to smite thee, bentUpon our Ráma's banishment.The Mango tree with axes fell,And tend instead the Neem tree well,Still watered with all care the treeWill never sweet and pleasant be.Thy mother's faults to thee descend,And with thy borrowed nature blend.True is the ancient saw: the NeemCan ne'er distil a honeyed stream.Taught by the tale of long ago

Thy mother's hateful sin we know.
A bounteous saint, as all have heard,A boon upon thy sire conferred,And all the eloquence revealedThat fills the wood, the flood, the field.No creature walked, or swam, or flew,But he its varied language knew.One morn upon his couch he heardThe chattering of a gorgeous bird.And as he marked its close intentHe laughed aloud in merriment.Thy mother furious with her lord,And fain to perish by the cord,Said to her husband: 'I would know,O Monarch, why thou laughest so.'
p. 137
The king in answer spake again:'If I this laughter should explain,This very hour would be my last,For death, be sure would follow fast.'Again thy mother, flushed with ire,To Kekaya spake, thy royal sire:'Tell me the cause; then live or die:I will not brook thy laugh, not I.'Thus by his darling wife addressed,The king whose might all earth confessedTo that kind saint his story told

Who gave the wondrous gift of old.
He listened to the king's complaint,And thus in answer spoke the saint:'King, let her quit thy home or die,But never with her prayer comply.'The saint's reply his trouble stilled,And all his heart with pleasure filled.Thy mother from his home he sent,And days like Lord Kuvera's spent.So thou wouldst force the king, misledBy thee, in evil paths to tread,And bent on evil wouldst begin,Through folly, this career of sin.Most true, methinks, in thee is shownThe ancient saw so widely known:The foils their fathers' worth declareAud girls their mothers' nature share.So be not thou. For pity's sakeAccept the word the monarch spake.Thy husband's will, O Queen, obey,And be the people's hope and stay.O, do not, urged by follv, drawThe king to tread on duty's law,The lord who all the world sustains,Bright as the God o'er Gods who reigns.Our glorious king, by sin unstained,Will never grant what fraud obtained;No shade of fault in him is seen:Let Ráma be anointed, Queen.

Remember, Queen, undying shame
Will through the world pursue thy name,If Ráma leave the king his sire,And, banished, to the wood retire.Come, from thy breast this fever fling:Of his own realm be Ráma king.None in this city e'er can dwellTo tend and love thee half so well.When Ráma sits in royal place,True to the custom of his raceOur monarch of the mighty bowA hermit to the woods will go.'  
1
Sumantra thus, palm joined to palm,Poured forth his words of bane and balm,With keen reproach, with pleading kind,Striving to move Kaikeyí's mind.In vain he prayed, in vain reproved,She heard unsoftened and unmoved.Nor could the eyes that watched her viewOne yielding look, one change of hue.
Footnotes
137:1 It was the custom of the kings of the solar 
dynasty to resign in their extreme old age the kingdom 

to the heir, and spend the remainder of their days in 
holy meditation in the forest: 
   'For such through ages in their life's decline    Is the good custom of Ikshváku's line.'
                                 Raghuvans'a.
Next: Canto XXXVI.: Siddhárth's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVI.: SIDDHÁRTH'S SPEECH.
Ikshváku's son with anguish torn
For the great oath his lips had sworn,With tears and sighs of sharpest painThus to Sumantra spake again:'Prepare thou quick a perfect force,Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse,To follow Raghu's scion henceEquipped with all magnificence.Let traders with the wealth they sell,And those who charming stories tell,And dancing-women fair of face,The prince's ample chariots grace.On all the train who throng his courts,And those who share his manly sports.Great gifts of precious wealth bestow,And bid them with their master go.Let noble arms, and many a wain,And townsmen swell the prince's train;And hunters best for woodland skillTheir places in the concourse fill.While elephants and deer he slays,Drinking wood honey as he strays,And looks on streams each fairer yet,His kingdom he may chance forget.

Let all my gold and wealth of corn
With Rama to the wilds be born;For it will soothe the exile's lotTo sacrifice in each pure spot,Deal ample largess forth, and meetEach hermit in his calm retreat.The wealth shall Ráma with him bear.Ayodhyá shall be Bharat's share.'
As thus Kakutstha's offspring spoke,
Fear in Katiketí's breast awoke.The freshness of her face was dried,Her trembling tongue was terror-tied.Alarmed and sad, with bloodless cheek,She turned to him and scarce could speak:'Nay, Sire, but Bharat shall not gainAn empty realm where none remain.My Bharat shall not rule a wasteReft of all sweets to charm the taste--The wine-cup's dregs, all dull and dead,Whence the light foam and life are fled.'   Thus in her rage the long-eyed dameSpoke her dire speech untouched by shame.
p. 138
Then, answering, Das'aratha spoke:'Why. having bowed me to the yoke.Dost thou, must cruel, spur and goad

Me who am struggling with the load?
Why didst thou not oppose at firstThis hope, vile Queen, so fondly nursed?'
Scarce could the monarch's angry speech
The ears of the fair lady reach,When thus, with double wrath inflamed,Kaikeyí to the king exclaimed:
'Sagar, from whom thy line is traced,
Drove forth his eldest son disgraced,Called Asamanj, whose fate we know:Thus should thy son to exile go.'
'Fie on thee, dame!' the monarch said;
Each of her people bent his head,And stood in shame and sorrow mute:She marked not, bold and resolute.Then great Siddhárth, inflamed with rage,The good old councillor and sageOn whose wise rede the king relied,To Queen Kaikeyí thus replied:'But Asamanj the cruel laidHis hands on infants as they played,Cast them to Sarjú's flood, and smiledFor pleasure when be drowned a child.'  
1
The people saw, and, furious, spedStraight the the king his sire and said:'Choose us, O glory of the throne,

Choose us. or Asamanj alone.'
'Whence comes this dread?' the monarch cried;And all the people thus replied:'In folly, King, he loves to layFierce hands upon our babes at play,Casts them to Sarjú's flood. and joysTo murder our bewildered boys.'With heedful ear the king of menHeard each complaining citizen.To please their troubled minds he strove,And from the state his son he drove.With wife and gear upon a carHe placed him quick, and sent him far.
And thus he gave commandment, 'He
Shall all his days an exile be.'With basket and with plough he strayedO'er mountain heights, through pathless shade,Roaming all lands a weary time,An outcast wretch defiled with crime.Sagar, the righteous path who held,His wicked offspring thus expelled.But what has Ráma done to blame?Why should his sentence be the same?No sin his stainless name can dim;We see no fault at all in him.Pure as the moon, no darkening blotOn his sweet life has left a spot.If thou canst see one fault, e'en one,

To dim the fame of Raghu's son,
That fault this hour, O lady, show.And Ráma to the wood shall go.To drive the guiltless to the wild,Truth's constant lover, undefiled.Would, by defiance of the right,The glory e'en of Indra blight.Then cease, O lady, and dismissThy hope to ruin Ráma's bliss,Or all thy gain, O fair of face,Will be men's hatred, and disgrace.'
Footnotes
138:1 See Book I, Canto XXXIX. An Indian prince in 
more modern times appears to have diverted himself in 
a similar way. 
It is still reported in Belgium that Appay Deasy was 
wont to amuse himself "by making several young and beautiful women stand side by side on a narrow balcony, without a parapet, overhanging the deep reservoir at the new palace in Nipani. He used then to pass along the line of trembling creatures, and suddenly thrusting one of them headlong into the water below, he used to watch her drowning, and derive pleasure from 

her dying agonies."--History of the Belgium District. By 
H. J. Stokes, M. S. C.
Next: Canto XXXVII.: The Coats of Bark.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVII.: THE COATS OF BARK.
Thus spake the virtuous sage: and then
Ráma addressed the king of men.In laws of meek behaviour bred,Thus to his sire he meekly said:
'King, I renounce all earthly care,
And live in woods on woodland fare.What, dead to joys, have I to doWith lordly train and retinue!Who gives his elephant and yetUpon the girths his heart will set?How can a cord attract his eyesWho gives away the nobler prize?Best of the good, with me he ledNo host, my King with banners spread.All wealth, all lordship I resign:The hermit's dress alone be mine.Before I go, have here conveyedA little basket and a spade.With these alone I go, content,For fourteen years of banishment.'
With her own hands Kaikeyí took

The hermit coats of bark, and, 'Look,'
She cried with bold unblushing browBefore the concourse, 'Dress thee now.'That lion leader of the braveTook from her hand the dress she gave,Cast his fine raiment on the ground,
p. 139
And round his waist the vesture bound.Then quick the hero Lakshman tooHis garment from his shoulders threw,And, in the presence of his sire,Indued the ascetic's rough attire.But Sítá, in her silks arrayed,Threw glances, trembling and afraid,On the bark coat she had to wear,Like a shy doe that eyes the snare.Ashamed and weeping for distressFrom the queen's hand she took the dress.The fair one, by her husband's sideWho matched heaven's minstrel monarch,  
1 cried:
'How bind they on their woodland dress,Those hermits of the wilderness?'
There stood the pride of Janak's race
Perplexed, with sad appealing face.One coat the lady's fingers grasped,One round her neck she feebly clasped,

But failed again, again, confused
By the wild garb she ne'er had used.Then quickly hastening Ráma, prideOf all who cherish virtue, tiedThe rough bark mantle on her, o'erThe silken raiment that she wore.
Then the sad women when they saw
Ráma the choice bark round her draw,Rained water from each tender eye,And cried aloud with bitter cry:'O, not on her, beloved, notOn Sítá falls thy mournful lot.If, faithful to thy father's will,Thou must go forth, leave Sítá still.Let Sítá still remaining hereOur hearts with her loved presence cheer.With Lakshman by thy side to aidSeek thou, dear son, the lonely shade.Unmeet, one good and fair as sheShould dwell in woods a devotee.Let not our prayers be prayed in vain:Let beauteous Sítá yet remain;For by thy love of duty tiedThou wilt not here thyself abide.'
Then the king's venerable guide
Vas'ishtha, when he saw each coatEnclose the lady's waist and throat,

Her zeal with gentle words repressed,
And Queen Kaikeyí thus addressed:'O evil-hearted sinner, shameOf royal Kekaya's race and name;Who matchless in thy sin couldst cheatThy lord the king with vile deceit;Lost to all sense of duty, knowSítá to exile shall not go.Sítá shall guard, as 'twere her own,The precious trust of Ráma's throne.
Those joined by wedlock's sweet control
Have but one self and common soul.Thus Sítá shall our empress be,For Ráma's self and soul is she.Or if she still to Ráma cleaveAnd for the woods the kingdom leave:If naught her loving heart deter,We and this town will follow her.The warders of the queen shall takeTheir wives and go for Ráma's sake,The nation with its stores of grain,The city's wealth shall swell his train.Bharat, S'atrughna both will wearBark mantles, and his lodging share,Still with their elder brother dwellIn the wild wood, and serve him well.Rest here alone, and rule thy stateUnpeopled, barren, desolate;

Be empress of the land and trees,
Thou sinner whom our sorrows please.The land which Ráma reigns not o'erShall bear the kingdom's name no more:The woods which Ráma wanders throughShall be our home and kingdom too.Bharat, be sure, will never deignO'er realms his father yields, to reign.Nay, if the king's true son he be,He will not, sonlike, dwell with thee.Nay, shouldst thou from the earth arise,And send thy message from the skies,To his forefathers' custom trueNo erring course would he pursue.So hast thou, by thy grievous fault,Offended him thou wouldst exalt.In all the world none draws his breathWho loves not Ráma, true to death.This day, O Queen, shalt thou beholdBirds, deer, and beasts from lea and foldTurn to the woods in Ráma's train.And naught save longing trees remain.'
Footnotes
139:1 Chitraratha, King of the celestial choristers.

Next: Canto XXXVIII.: Care For Kaus'alyá

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVIII.: CARE FOR KAUS'ALYÁ
Then when the people wroth and sad
Saw Sítá in bark vesture clad,Though wedded, like some widowed thing,They cried out, 'Shame upon thee, King!'Grieved by their cry and angry lookThe lord of earth at once forsookAll hope in life that still remained,In duty, self, and fame unstained.Ikshváku's son with burning sighsOn Queen Kaikeyí bent his eyes,And said: 'But Sítá must not fleeIn garments of a devotee.My holy guide has spoken truth:Unfit is she in tender youth,
p. 140
So gently nurtured, soft and fair,The hardships of the wood to share.   How has she sinned, devout and true,     The noblest monarch's child,   That she should garb of bark indue     And journey to the wild?   That she should spend her youthful days

     Amid a hermit band,
   Like some poor mendicant who strays     Sore troubled, through the land?   Ah, let the child of Janak throw     Her dress of bark aside,   And let the royal lady go     With royal wealth supplied.   Not such the pledge I gave before,     Unfit to linger here:   The oath, which I the sinner swore     Is kept, and leaves her clear.   Won from her childlike love this too     My instant death would be,   As blossoms on the old bamboo     Destroy the parent tree.  
1
If aught amiss by Ráma doneOffend thee, O thou wicked one,What least transgiession canst thou findIn her, thou worst of womankind?What shade of fault in her appears,Whose full soft eye is like the deer's?What canst thou blame in Janak's child,So gentle, modest, true, and mild?Is not one crime complete, that sentMy Ráma forth to banishment!And wilt thou other sins commit.Thou wicked one, to double it?This is the pledge and oath I swore,What thou besoughtest, and no more,

Of Ráma--for I heard thee, dame--
When he for consecration came.Now with this limit not content,In hell should be thy punishment,Who fain the Maithil bride wouldst pressTo clothe her limbs with hermit dress.'
Thus spake the father in his woe;
And Ráma, still prepared to go,To him who sat with drooping headSpake in return these words and said:
'Just King, here stands my mother dear,
Kaus'alyá, one whom all revere.Submissive, gentle, old is she,And keeps her lips from blame of thee,For her, kind lord, of me bereftA sea of whelming woe is left.O, show her in her new distressStill fonder love and tenderness.Well honoured by thine honoured handHer grief for me let her withstand,Who wrapt in constant thought of meIn me would live a devotee.
   Peer of Mahendra, O, to her be kind,
     And treat I pray, my gentle mother so,   That, when I dwell afar, her life resigned,     She may not, pass, to Yama's realm for woe.'

Footnotes
140:1 It is said that the bamboo dies after flowering.
Next: Canto XXXIX.: Counsel To Sítá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIX.: COUNSEL TO SÍTÁ.
Scarce had the sire, with each dear queen,
Heard Ráma's pleading voice, and seenHis darling in his hermit dressEre failed his senses for distress.Convulsed with woe, his soul that shook,On Raghu's son he could not look;Or if he looked with failing eyeHe could not to the chief reply.By pangs of bitter grief assailed,The long-armed monarch wept and wailed,Half dead a while and sore distraught,While Ráma filled his every thought.'This hand of mine in days ere nowHas reft her young from many a cow.Or living things has idly slain:Hence comes, I ween, this hour of pain.Not till the hour is come to dieCan from its shell the spirit fly.Death comes not, and Kaikeyí stillTorments the wretch she cannot kill,Who sees his son before him quitThe fine soft robes his rank that fit,And, glorious as the burning fire,In hermit garb his limbs attire.

Now all the people grieve and groan
Through Queen Kaikeyí's deed alone,Who, having dared this deed of sin,Strives for herself the gain to win.'
He spoke. With tears his eyes grew dim,
His senses all deserted him.He cried, O Ráma, once, then weakAnd fainting could no further speak.Unconscious there he lay: at lengthRegathering his sense and strength,While his full eyes their torrents shed,To wise Sumantra thus he said:'Yoke the light car, and hither leadFleet coursers of the noblest breed,And drive this heir of lofty fateBeyond the limit of the state.This seems the fruit that virtues bear,The meed of worth which texts declare--The sending of the brave and goodBy sire and mother to the wood.'
He heard the monarch, and obeyed,
With ready feet that ne'er delayed,And brought before the palace gateThe horses and the car of state.Then to the monarch's son he sped,And raising hands of reverence said

p. 141
That the light car which gold made fair,
With best of steeds, was standing there.King Das'aratha called in hasteThe lord o'er all his treasures placed.And spoke, well skilled in place and time,His will to him devoid of crime:'Count all the years she has to liveAfar in forest wilds, and giveTo Sítá robes and gems of priceAs for the time may well suffice.'Quick to the treasure-room he went,Charged by that king most excellent,Brought the rich stores, and gave them allTo Sítá in the monarch's hall.The Maithil dame of high descentReceived each robe and ornament,And tricked those limbs, whose lines foretoldHigh destiny, with gems and gold.So well adorned, so fair to view,A glory through the hall she threw:So, when the Lord of Light upsprings,His radiance o'er the sky he flings.Then Queen Kaus'alyá spake at last,With loving arms about her cast,Pressed lingering kisses on her head,And to the high-souled lady said:'Ah, in this faithless world below

When dark misfortune comes and woe,
Wives, loved and cherished every day,Neglect their lords and disobey.Yes, woman's nature still is this:--After long days of calm and blissWhen some light grief her spirit tries,She changes all her love, or flies.Young wives are thankless, false in soul,With roving hearts that spurn control.Brooding on sin and quickly changed,In one short hour their love estranged.Not glorious deed or lineage fair,Not knowledge, gift, or tender careIn chains of lasting love can bindA woman's light inconstant mind.But those good dames who still maintainWhat right, truth, Scripture, rule ordain--No holy thing in their pure eyesWith one beloved husband vies.Nor let thy lord my son, condemnedTo exile, be by thee contemned,For be he poor or wealthy, heIs as a God, dear child, to thee.'
When Sítá heard Kaus'alyá's speech
Her duty and her gain to teach,She joined her palms with reverent graceAnd gave her answer face to face:'All will I do, forgetting naught,

Which thou,O honoured Queen, hast taught.
I know, have heard, and deep have storedThe rules of duty to my lord.Not me, good Queen, shouldst thou includeAmong the faithless multitude.Its own sweet light the moon shall leaveEre I to duty cease to cleave.The stringless lute gives forth no strain,The wheelless car is urged in vain;No joy a lordless dame, althoughBlest with a hundred sons, can know.From father, brother, and from sonA measured share of joy is won:Who would not honour, love, and blessHer lord, whose gifts are measureless?Thus trained to think, I hold in aweScripture's command and duty's law.Him can I hold in slight esteem?Her lord is woman's God, I deem.'Kaus'alyá heard the lady's speech,Nor failed those words her heart to reach.Then, pure in mind, she gave to flowThe tear that sprang of joy and woe.Then duteous Ráma forward cameAnd stood before the honoured dame,And joining reverent hands addressedThe queen in rank above the rest:'O mother, from these tears refrain;Look on my sire and still thy pain.

To thee my days afar shall fly
As if sweet slumber closed thine eye,And fourteen years of exile seemTo thee, dear mother, like a dream.On me returning safe and well,Girt by my friends, thine eyes shall dwell.'
Thus for their deep affection's sake
The hero to his mother spake,Then to the half seven hundred too.Wives of his sire, paid reverence due.Thus Das'aratha's son addressedThat crowd of matrons sore distressed:'If from these lips, while here I dwelt,One heedless taunt you e'er have felt,Forgive me, pray. And now adieu,I bid good-bye to all of you.'Then straight, like curlews' cries, upwentThe voices of their wild lament,While, as he bade farewell, the crowdOf royal women wept aloud,And through the ample hall's extent.Where erst the sound of tabour, blentWith drum and shrill-toned instrument,   In joyous concert rose,Now rang the sound of wailing high,The lamentation and the cry,The shriek, the choking sob, the sigh   That told the ladies' woes.

Next: Canto XL.: Ráma's Departure.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XL.: RÁMA'S DEPARTURE.
Then Ráma, Sítá, Lakshman bent
At the king's feet, and sadly went
p. 142
Round him with slow steps reverent.When Ráma of the duteous heartHad gained his sire's consent to part,With Sítá by his side he paidDue reverence to the queen dismayed.And Lakshman, with affection meet,Bowed down and clasped his mother's feet.Sumitrá viewed him as he pressedHer feet, and thus her son addressed:'Neglect not Ráma wandering there,But tend him with thy faithful care.In hours of wealth, in time of woe,Him, sinless son, thy refuge know.From this good law the just ne'er swerve,That younger sons the eldest serve,And to this righteous rule inclineAll children of thine ancient line--Freely to give, reward each rite,Nor spare their bodies in the fight.

Let Ráma Das'aratha be,
Look upon Sítá as on me,And let the cot wherein you dwellBe thine Ayodhyá. Fare thee well."Her blessing thus Sumitrá gaveTo him whose soul to Ráma clave,Exclaiming, when her speech was done,' Go forth, O Lakshman, go, my son.Go forth, my son to win success,High victory and happiness.Go forth thy foemen to destroy,And turn again at last with joy.'  As Mátali his charioteerSpeaks for the Lord of Gods to hear,Sumantra, palm to palm applied,In reverence trained, to Ráma cried:'O famous Prince, my car ascend,--May blessings on thy course attend,--And swiftly shall my horses fleeAnd place thee where thou biddest me.The fourteen years thou hast to stayFar in the wilds, begin to-day;For Oueen Kaikeyí cries, Away."   Then Sítá, best of womankind,Ascended, with a tranquil mind,Soon as her toilet task was done,That chariot brilliant as the sun.Ráma and Lakshman true and boldSprang on the car adorned with gold.

The king those years had counted o'er,
And given Sítá robes and storeOf precious ornaments to wearWhen following her husband there.The brothers in the car found placeFor nets and weapons of the chase,There warlike arms and mail they laid,A leathern basket and a spade.Soon as Sumantra saw the threeWere seated in the chariot, heUrged on each horse of noble breed,Who matched the rushing wind in speed.As thus the son of Raghu went
Forth for his dreary banishment,
Chill numbing grief the town assailed,All strength grew weak, all spirit failed,Ayodhá through her wide extentWas filled with tumult and lament:Steeds neighed and shook the bells they bore,Each elephant returned a roar.Then all the city, young and old,Wild with their sorrow uncontrolled,Rushed to the car, as, from the sunThe panting herds to water run.Before the car, behind, they clung,And there as eagerly they hung,With torrents streaming from their eyes,Called loudly with repeated cries:

'Listen, Sumantra: draw thy rein;
Drive gently, and thy steeds restrain.Once more on Ráma will we gaze,Now to be lost for many days.The queen his mother has, be sure,A heart of iron, to endureTo see her godlike Ráma go,Nor feel it shattered by the blow.Sítá, well done! Videha's pride,Still like his shadow by his side;Rejoicing in thy duty stillAs sunlight cleaves to Meru's hill.Thou, Lakshman, too, hast well deserved,Who from thy duty hast not swerved,Tending the peer of Gods above,Whose lips speak naught but words of love.Thy firm resolve is nobly great,And high success on thee shall wait.Yea, thou shalt win a priceless meed--Thy path with him to heaven shall lead,'As thus they spake, they could not holdThe tears that down their faces rolled,While still they followed for a spaceTheir darling of Ikshváku's race.   There stood surrounded by a ringOf mournful wives the mournful king;For, 'I will see once more,' he cried,'Mine own dear son,' and forth he hied.As he came near, there rose the sound

Of weeping, as the dames stood round.
So the she-elephants complainWhen their great lord and guide is slain.Kakutstha's son, the king of men,The glorious sire, looked troubled then,As the full moon is when dismayedBy dark eclipse's threatening shade.Then Das'aratha's son, designedFor highest fate of lofty mind.Urged to more speed the charioteer,'Away, away! why linger here?Urge on thy horses,' Rama cried,And 'Stay, O stay,' the people sighed.Sumantra, urged to speed away,The townsmen's call must disobey,Forth as the long-armed hero went,
p. 143
The dust his chariot wheels up sentWas laid by streams that ever flowedFrom their sad eyes who filled the road.Then, sprung of woe, from eyes of allThe women drops began to fall,As from each lotus on the lakeThe darting fish the water shake.When he, the king of high renown,Saw that one thought held all the town,Like some tall tree he fell and lay,

Whose root the axe has hewn away.
Then straight a mighty cry from thoseWho followed Ráma's car arose,Who saw their monarch fainting thereBeneath that grief too great to bear.Then 'Ráma, Ráma!" with the cryOf 'Ah, his mother!' sounded high,As all the people wept aloudAround the ladies' sorrowing crowd.When Ráma backward turned his eye,And saw the king his father lieWith troubled sense and failing limb,And the sad queen, who followed him,Like some young creature in the net,That will not, in its misery, letIts wild eyes on its mother rest,So, by the bonds of duty pressed,His mother's look he could not meet.He saw them with their weary feet,Who, used to bliss, in cars should ride,Who ne'er by sorrow should be tried,And, as one mournful look he cast,'Drive on,' he cried, 'Sumantra, fast.'As when the driver's torturing hookGoads on an elephant, the lookOf sire and mother in despairWas more than Ráma's heart could bear.As mother kine to stalls returnWhich hold the calves for whom they yearn,

So to the car she tried to run
As a cow seeks her little one.Once and again the hero's eyesLooked on his mother, as with criesOf woe she called and gestures wild,'O Sítá, Lakshman, O my child!''Stay,' cried the king, 'thy chariot stay:''On, on,' cried Ráma, 'speed away.'As one between two hosts, inclinedTo neither was Sumantra's mind.But Ráma spake these words again:'A lengthened woe is bitterest pain.On, on; and if his wrath grow hot,Thine answer be, ' I heard thee not.'Sumantra, at the chief's behest,Dismissed the crowd that toward him pressed,And, as he bade, to swiftest speedUrged on his way each willing steed.The king's attendants parted thence,And paid him heart-felt reverence:In mind, and with the tears he wept,Each still his place near Ráma kept.As swift away the horses sped,His lords to Das'aratha said:'To follow him whom thou againWouldst see returning home is vain.'   With failing limb and drooping mien     He heard their counsel wise:   Still on their son the king and queen

     Kept fast their lingering eyes.  1
Next: Canto XLI.: The Citizens' Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLI.: THE CITIZENS' LAMENT.
The lion chief with hands upraised
Was born from eyes that fondly gazed.But then the ladies' bower was rentWith cries of weeping and lament:'Where goes he now, our lord, the sureProtector of the friendless poor,In whom the wretched and the weakDefence and aid were wont to seek?All words of wrath he turned aside,And ne'er, when cursed, in ire replied.He shared his people's woe, and stilledThe troubled breast which rage had filled.Our chief, on lofty thoughts intent,In glorious fame preeminent:As on his own dear mother, thusHe ever looked on each of us.Where goes he now? His sire's behest,By Queen Kaikeyí's guile distressed,Has banished to the forest henceHim who was all the world's defence.Ah, senseless King, to drive awayThe hope of men, their guard and stay,To banish to the distant woodRáma the duteous, true, and good!'

The royal dames, like cows bereaved
Of their young calves, thus sadly grieved.The monarch heard them as they wailed,And by the fire of grief assailedFor his dear son, he bowed his head,And all his sense and memory fled.   Then were no fires of worship fed,Thick darkness o'er the sun was spread.The cows their thirsty calves denied,And elephants flung their food aside.
p. 144
Tris'anku,  1 Jupiter looked dread,
And Mercury and Mars the red,In direful opposition met,The glory of the moon beset.The lunar stars withheld their light,The planets were no longer bright,But meteors with their horrid glare,And dire Vis'ákhás  
2 lit the air.
As troubled Ocean heaves and ravesWhen Doom's wild tempest sweeps the waves,Thus all Ayodhyá reeled and bentWhen Ráma to the forest went.And chilling grief and dark despairFell suddenly on all men there.Their wonted pastime all forgot,Nor thought of food, or touched it not.

Crowds in the royal street were seen
With weeping eye and troubled mien:No more a people gay and glad,Each head and heart was sick and sad.No more the cool wind softly blew,The moon no more was fair to view,No more the sun with genial glowCherished the world now plunged in woe.Sons, brothers, husbands, wedded wivesForgot the ties that joined their lives;No thought for kith and kin was spared,But all for only Ráma cared.And Ráma's friends who loved him best,Their minds disordered and distressed.By the great burthen of their woesTurned not to slumber or repose.   Like Earth with all her hills bereft     Of Indra's guiding care.   Ayodhyá in her sorrow left     By him, the high souled heir.   Was bowed by fear and sorrow's force,     And shook with many a throe,   While warrior, elephant, and horse     Sent up the cry of woe.
Footnotes

143:1 'Thirty centuries have passed since he began this 
memorable journey. Every step of it is known and is 
annually traversed by thousands: hero worship is not extinct. What can Faith do! How strong are the ties of religion when entwined with the legends of a country! How many a cart creeps creaking and weary along the road from Ayodhyá to Chitrakút. It is this that gives the Rámáyan a strange interest, the story still lives.' Calcutta Review: Vol. XXIII.
Next: Canto XLII.: Das'aratha's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLII.: DAS'ARATHA'S LAMENT.
While yet the dust was seen afar
That marked the course of Ráma's car,The glory of Ikshváku's raceTurned not away his eager face.While yet his duteous son he sawHe could not once his gaze withdraw,But rooted to the spot remainedWith eyes that after Ráma strained.But when that dust no more he viewed,Fainting he fell by grief subdued.
To his right hand Kaus'alyá went,
And ready aid the lady lent,While Bharat's loving mother triedTo raise him on the other side.The king, within whose ordered soulJustice and virtue held control,To Queen Kaikeyí turned and said,With every sense disquieted:'Touch me not, thou whose soul can plotAll sin. Kaikeyí, touch me not.No loving wife, no friend to me,I ne'er again would look on thee;Ne'er from this day have aught to do

With thee and all thy retinue;
Thee whom no virtuous thoughts restrain,Whose selfish heart seeks only gain.The hand I laid in mine, O dame,The steps we took around the flame,  
1b
And all that links thy life to mineHere and hereafter I resign.If Bharat too, thy darling son,Joy in the rule thy art has won,Ne'er may the funeral offerings paidBy his false hand approach my shade.'   Then while the dust upon him hung,The monarch to Kaus'alyá clung,And she with mournful steps and slowTurned to the palace, worn with woe.As one whose hand has touched the fire,Or slain a Bráhman in his ire,He felt his heart with sorrow tornStill thinking of his son forlorn.Each step was torture, as the roadThe traces of the chariot showed,And as the shadowed sun grows dimSo cure and anguish darkened him.He raised a cry, by woe distraught,As of his son again he thought.And judging that the car had spedBeyond the city, thus he said:'I still behold the foot-prints madeBy the good horses that conveyed

My son afar: these marks I see,
But high-souled Ráma, where is he?Ah me, my son! my first and best,On pleasant conches wont to rest,With limbs perfumed with sandal, fannedBy many a beauty's tender hand:Where will he lie with log or stoneBeneath him for a pillow thrown,To leave at morn his earthy bed,Neglected, and with dust o'erspread,As from the flood with sigh and pantComes forth the husband elephant?The men who make the woods their homeShall see the long-armed hero roamRoused from his bed, though lord of all,In semblance of a friendless thrall.Janak's dear child who ne'er has met
p. 145
With aught save joy and comfort yet,Will reach to-day the forest, wornAnd wearied with the brakes of thorn.Ah, gentle girl, of woods unskilled,How will her heart with dread be filledAt the wild beasts' deep roaring there,Whose voices lift the shuddering hair!Kaikeyí, glory in thy gain,And, widow queen, begin to reign:

No will, no power to live have I
When my brave son no more is nigh.'   Thus pouring forth laments, the king,Girt by the people's crowded ring,Entered the noble bower like oneNew-bathed when funeral rites are done.Where'er he looked naught met his gazeBut empty houses, courts, and ways.Closed were the temples: countless feetNo longer trod the royal street,And thinking of his son he viewedMen weak and worn and woe-subdued.As sinks the sun into a cloud,So passed he on, and wept aloud,Within that house no more to beThe dwelling of the banished three,Brave Ráma, his Videhan bride,And Lakshman by his brother's side:Like broad still waters, when the kingOf all the birds that ply the wingHas swooped from heaven and borne awayThe glittering snakes that made them gay.With choking sobs and voice half spentThe king renewed his sad lament:With broken utterance faint and lowScarce could he speak these words of woe:'My steps to Ráma's mother guide,And place me by Kaus'alyá's side:There, only there my heart may know

Some little respite from my woe.'
   The warders of the palace ledThe monarch, when his words were said,To Queen Kaus'alyá's bower, and thereLaid him with reverential care.But while he rested on the bedStill was his soul disquieted.In grief he tossed his arms on highLamenting with a piteous cry:'O Ráma, Ráma,' thus said he,'My son, thou hast forsaken me.High bliss awaits those favoured menLeft living in Ayodhyá then,Whose eyes shall see my son once moreReturning when the time is o'er.'Then came the night, whose hated gloomFell on him like the night of doom.At midnight Das'aratha criedTo Queen Kaus'alyá by his side:I see thee not, Kaus'alyá; layThy gentle hand in mine, I pray.When Ráma left his home my sightWent with him, nor returns to-night.'
Footnotes
144:1 See p. 72.

144:2 Four stars of the sixteenth lunar asterism.
144:1b In the marriage service.
Next: Canto XLIII.: Kaus'alyá's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIII.: KAUS'ALYÁ'S LAMENT.
Kaus'alyá saw the monarch lie
With drooping frame and failing eye,And for her banished son distressedWith these sad words her lord addressed:'Kaikeyí, cruel, false, and vileHas cast the venom of her guileOn Ráma lord of men, and sheWill ravage like a snake set free;And more and more my soul alarm,Like a dire serpent bent on harm.For triumph crowns each dark intent,And Ráma to the wild is sent.Ah, were he doomed but here to strayBegging his food from day to day,Or do, enslaved, Kaikeyí's will,This were a boon, a comfort still.But she, as chose her cruel hate,Has hurled him from his high estate,As Bráhmans when the moon is newCast to the ground the demons' due.  
1
The long-armed hero, like the lordOf Nágas, with his bow and swordBegins, I ween, his forest lifeWith Lakshman and his faithful wife.

Ah, how will fare the exiles now,
Whom, moved by Queen Kaikeyí, thouHast sent in forests to abide,Bred in delights, by woe untried?Far banished when their lives are young,With the fair fruit before them hung,Deprived of all their rank that suits,How will they live on grain and roots?O, that my years of woe were passed,And the glad hour were come at lastWhen I shall see my children dear,Ráma, his wife, and Lakshman here!When shall Ayodhyá, wild with glee,Again those mighty heroes see,And decked with wreaths her banners waveTo welcome home the true and brave?When will the beautiful city viewWith happy eyes the lordly twoReturning, joyful as the mainWhen the dear moon is full again?When, like some mighty bull who leadsThe cow exulting through the meads,Will Ráma through the city ride,Strong-armed, with Sítá at his side?When will ten thousand thousand meetAnd crowd Ayodhyá's royal street,And grain in joyous welcome throwUpon my sons who tame the foe?When with delight shall youthful bands

Of Bráhman maidens in their hands
p. 146
Bear fruit and flowers in goodly show,
And circling round Ayodhyá go?With ripened judgment of a sage,And godlike in his blooming age,When shall my virtuous son appear,Like kindly rain, our hearts to cheer?Ah, in a former life, I ween,This hand of mine, most base and mean,Has dried the udders of the kineAnd left the thirsty calves to pine.Hence, as the lion robs the cow,Kaikeyí makes me childless now,Exulting from her feebler foeTo rend the son she cherished so.I had but him, in Scripture skilled,With every grace his soul was filled.Now not a joy has life to give,And robbed of him I would not live:Yea, all my days are dark and drearIf he, my darling, be not near,And Lakshman brave, my heart to cheer.As for my son I mourn and yearn,The quenchless flames of anguish burn   And kill me with the pain,As in the summer's noontide blaze

The glorious Day-God with his rays
   Consumes the parching plain.´
Footnotes
145:1 The husks and chaff of the rice offered to the 
Gods.
Next: Canto XLIV.: Sumitra's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIV.: SUMITRA'S SPEECH.
Kaus´alyá ceased her sad lament,
Of beauteous dames most excellent.Sumitrá who to duty clave,In righteous words this answer gave:'Dear Queen, all noble virtues graceThy son, of men the first in place.Why dost thou shed these tears of woeWith bitter grief lamenting so?If Ráma, leaving royal swayHas hastened to the woods away,'Tis for his high-souled father's sakeThat he his promise may not break.He to the path of duty clingsWhich lordly fruit hereafter brings--The path to which the righteous cleave--For him, dear Queen, thou shouldst not grieve.And Lakshman too. the blameless-souled,The same high course with him will hold,And mighty bliss on him shall wait,So tenderly compassionate.And Sítá, bred with tender care,Well knows what toils await her there,But in her love she will not partFrom Ráma of the virtuous heart.

Now has thy son through all the world
The banner of his fame unfurled:True, modest, careful of his vow,What has he left to aim at now?The sun will mark his mighty soul,His wisdom, sweetness, self-control,Will spare from pain his face and limb,And with soft radiance shine for him.For him through forest glades shall springA soft auspicious breeze, and bringIts tempered heat and cold to playAround him ever night and day.The pure cold moonbeams shall delightThe hero as he sleeps at night,And soothe him with the soft caressOf a fond parent's tenderness.To him, the bravest of the brave,His heavenly arms the Bráhman gave,When fierce Suváhu dyed the plainWith his life-blood by Ráma slain.Still trusting to his own right armThy hero son will fear no harm:As in his father's palace, heIn the wild woods will dauntless be.Whene'er he lets his arrows flyHis stricken foemen fall and die:And is that prince of peerless worthToo weak to keep and sway the earth?His sweet pure soul, his beauty's charm,

His hero heart, his warlike arm,
Will soon redeem his rightful reignWhen from the woods he comes again.The Bráhmans on the prince's headKing-making drops shall quickly shed,And Sitá, Earth, and Fortune shareThe glories which await the heir.For him, when forth his chariot swept,The crowd that thronged Ayodhyá wept,With agonizing woe distressed.With him in hermít's mantle dressedIn guise of Sítá Lakshmí went,And none his glory may prevent.Yea, naught to him is high or hard,Before whose steps, to be his guard,Lakshman, the best who draws the bow,With spear, shaft, sword rejoiced to go.His wanderings in the forest o'er,Thine eyes shall see thy son once more.Quit thy faint heart, thy grief dispel,For this, O Queen, is truth I tell.Thy son returning, moonlike, thence,Shall at thy feet do reverence,And, blest and blameless lady, thouShalt see his head to touch them bow,Yea, thou shalt see thy son made kingWhen he returns with triumphing,And how thy happy eyes will brimWith tears of joy to look on him!

Thou, blameless lady, shouldst the whole
Of the sad people here console:Why in thy tender heart allowThis bitter grief to harbour now?As the long banks of cloud distilTheir water when they see the hill,
p. 147
So shall the drops of rapture runFrom thy glad eyes to see thy sonReturning, as he lowly bendsTo greet thee, girt by all his friends.'   Thus soothing, kindly eloquent,With every hopeful argumentKaus'alyá's heart by sorrow rent,   Fair Queen Sumitrá ceased.Kaus'alyá heard each pleasant plea,And grief began to leave her free,As the light clouds of autumn flee,   Their watery stores decreased.
Next: Canto XLV.: The Tamasá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLV.: THE TAMASÁ.
Their tender love the people drew
To follow Ráma brave and true,The high-souled hero, as he wentForth from his home to banishment.The king himself his friends obeyed,And turned him homeward as they prayed.But yet the people turned not back,Still close on Ráma's chariot track.For they who in Ayodhyá dweltFor him such fond affection felt,Decked with all grace and glories high,The dear full moon of every eye.Though much his people prayed and wept,Kakutstha's son his purpose kept,And still his journey would pursueTo keep the king his father true.Deep in the hero's bosom sankTheir love, whose signs his glad eye drank.He spoke to cheer them, as his ownDear children, in a loving tone:'If ye would grant my fond desire,Give Bharat now that love entireAnd reverence shown to me by allWho dwell within Ayodhyá's wall.

For he, Kaikeyí's darling son,
His virtuous career will run,And ever bound by duty's chainConsult your weal and bliss and gain.In judgment old, in years a child,With hero virtues meek and mild,A fitting lord is he to cheerHis people and remove their fear.In him all kingly gifts abound,Wore noble than in me are found:Imperial prince, well proved and tried--Obey him as your lord and guide.And grant, I pray, the boon I ask:To please the king be still your task,That his fond heart, while I remainFar in the wood, may feel no pain.'   The more he showed his will to treadThe path where filial duty led,The more the people, round him thronged,For their dear Ráma's empire longed.Still more attached his followers grew,As Ráma, with his brother, drewThe people with his virtues' ties,Lamenting all with tear-dimmed eyes.The saintly twice-born, triply oldIn glory, knowledge, seasons told,With hoary heads that shook and bowed,Their voices raised and spake aloud:'O steeds, who best and noblest are,

Who whirl so swiftly Ráma's car,
Go not, return: we call on you:Be to your master kind and true.For speechless things are swift to hear,And naught can match a horse's ear.O generous steeds, return, when thusYou hear the cry of all of us.Each vow he keeps most firm and sure,And duty makes his spirit pure.Back with our chief! not wood-ward hence;Back to his royal residence!'   Soon as he saw the aged band.Exclaiming in their misery, stand,And their sad cries around him rang,Swift from his chariot Ráma sprang.Then, still upon his journey bent,With Sítá and with Lakshman wentThe hero by the old men's sideSuiting to theirs his shortened stride.He could not pass the twice-born throngAs weariedly they walked along:With pitying heart, with tender eye,He could not in his chariot fly.When the steps of Ráma viewedThat still his onward course pursued.Woe shook the troubled heart of each,And burnt with grief they spoke this speech--   'With thee, O Ráma, to the woodAll Bráhmans go and Bráhmanhood:

Borne on our aged shoulders, see,
Our fires of worship go with thee.Bright canopies that lend their shadeIn Vajapeya 
1 rites displayed,
In plenteous store are borne behindLike cloudlets in the autumn wind.No shelter from the sun hast thou,And, lest his fury burn thy brow,These sacrificial shades we bearShall aid thee in the noontide glare.Our hearts, who ever loved to poreOn sacred text and Vedic lore,Now all to thee, beloved, turn,And for a life in forests yearn.Deep in our aged bosoms liesThe Vedas' lore, the wealth we prize,There still, like wives at home, shall dwell,Whose love and truth protect them well.
p. 148
To follow thee our hearts are bent;We need not plan or argument.All else in duty's law we slight,For following thee is following right.O noble Prince, retrace thy way:O, hear us, Ráma, as we lay,With many tears and many prayers,Our aged heads and swan-white hairs

Low in the dust before thy feet;
O, hear us, Ráma, we entreat.Full many of these who with thee run,Their sacred rites had just begun.Unfinished yet those rites remain;But finished if thou turn again.All rooted life and things that moveTo thee their deep affection prove.To them, when warmed by love, they glowAnd sue to thee, some favour showEach lowly bush, each towering treeWould follow too for love of thee.Bound by its root it must remain;But--all it can--its boughs complain,As when the wild wind rushes byIt tells its woe in groan and sigh.No more through air the gay birds flit,But, foodless, melancholy sitTogether on the branch and callTo thee whose kind heart feels for all.'
As wailed the aged Bráhmans, bent
To turn him back, with wild lament,Seemed Tamasá herself to aid,Checking his progress, as they prayed.Sumantra from the chariot freedWith ready hand each weary steed;He groomed them with the utmost heed,

Their limbs he bathed and dried,
Then led them forth to drink and feedAt pleasure in the grassy meadThat fringed the river side.
Footnotes
147:1 An important sacrifice at which seventeen victims 
were immolated.
Next: Canto XLVI.: The Halt.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVI.: THE HALT.
When Ráma. chief of Raghu's race,
Arrived at that delightful place,He looked on Sítá first, and thenTo Lakshman spake the lord of men:'Now first the shades of night descendSince to the wilds our steps we bend.Joy to thee, brother! do not grieveFor our dear home and all we leave.The woods unpeopled seem to weepAround us, as their tenants creepOr fly to lair and den and nest,Both bird and beast, to seek their rest.Methinks Ayodhyá's royal townWhere dwells my sire of high renown,With all her men and dames to-nightWill mourn us vanished from their sight.For, by his virtues won, they clingIn fond affection to their king,And thee and me, O brave and true,And Bharat and S'atrughna too.I for my sire and mother feelDeep sorrow o'er my bosom steal,Lest mourning us, oppressed with fears,They blind their eyes with endless tears.

Yet Bharat's duteous love will show
Sweet comfort in their hours of woe,And with kind words their hearts sustain,Suggesting duty, bliss, and gain.I mourn my parents now no more:I count dear Bharat's virtues o'er,And his kind love and care dispelThe doubts I had, and all is well.And thou thy duty wouldst not shun,And, following me, hast nobly done;Else, bravest, I should need a bandAround my wife as guard to stand.On this first night, my thirst to slake,Some water only will I take:Thus, brother, thus my will decides,Though varied store the wood provides.'
Thus having said to Lakshman, he
Addressed in turn Sumantra: 'BeMost diligent to-night, my friend,And with due care thy horses tend.'The sun had set: Sumantra tiedHis noble horses side by side,Gave store of grass with liberal hand,And rested near them on the strand.Each paid the holy evening rite,And when around them fell the night,The charioteer, with Lakshman's aid,A lowly bed for Ráma laid.

To Lakshman Ráma bade adieu,
And then by, Sítá's side he threwHis limbs upon the leafy bedTheir care upon the bank had spread.When Lakshman saw the couple slept,Still on the strand his watch he kept,Still with Sumantra there conversed,And Ráma's varied gifts rehearsed.All night he watched, nor sought repose,Till on the earth the sun arose:With him Sumantra stayed awake,And still of Ráma's virtues spake.Thus, near the river's grassy shoreWhich herds unnumbered wandered o'er,Repose, untroubled, Ráma found,And all the people lay around.The glorious hero left his bed,Looked on the sleeping crowd, and saidTo Lakshman, whom each lucky lineMarked out for bliss with surest sign:'O brother Lakshman, look on theseReclining at the roots of trees;All care of house and home resigned,Caring for us with heart and mind,These people of the city yearn
p. 149
To see us to our home return:

To quit their lives will they consent,
But never leave their firm intent.Come, while they all unconscious sleep,Let us upon the chariot leap,And swiftly on our journey speedWhere naught our progress may impede,That these fond citizens who roamFar from Ikshváku's ancient home,No more may sleep 'neath bush and tree,Following still for love of me.A prince with tender care should healThe self-brought woes his people feel,And never let his subjects shareThe burthen he is forced to bear.'   Then Lakshman to the chief replied,Who stood like Justice by his side:'Thy rede, O sage, I well commend:Without delay the car ascend.'Then Ráma to Sumantra spoke:'Thy rapid steeds, I pray thee, yoke.Hence to the forest will I go:Away, my lord, and be not slow.'   Sumantra, urged to utmost speed,Yoked to the car each generous steed,And then, with hand to hand applied,He came before the chief and cred:'Hail, Prince, whom mighty arms adorn,Hail, bravest of the chariot-borne!With Sítá and thy brother thou

Mayst mount: the car is ready now.'
   The hero clomb the car with haste:His bow and gear within were placed,And quick the eddying flood he passedOf Tamasá whose waves run fast.Soon as he touched the farther side.That strong-armed hero, glorified,He found a road both wide and clear,Where e'en the timid naught could fear.Then, that the crowd might be misled,Thus Ráma to Sumantra said:'Speed north a while, then hasten back,Returning in thy former track,That so the people may not learnThe course I follow: drive and turn.'   Sumantra, at the chief's behest.Quick to the task himself addressed;Then near to Ráma came, and showedThe chariot ready for the road.With Sítá, then, the princely two,Who o'er the line of Raghu threwA glory ever bright and new,   Upon the chariot stood.Sumantra fast and faster droveHis horses, who in fleetness stroveStill onward to the distant grove,   The hermit-haunted wood.

Next: Canto XLVII.: The Citizens' Return.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVII.: THE CITIZENS' RETURN.
The people, when the morn shone fair,
Arose to find no Ráma there.Then fear and numbing grief subduedThe senses of the multitude.The woe-born tears were running fastAs all around their eyes they cast,And sadly looked, but found no traceOf Ráma, searching every place.Bereft of Ráma good and wise.With drooping cheer and weeping eyes,Each woe-distracted sage gave ventTo sorrow in his wild lament:'Woe worth the sleep that stole our senseWith its beguiling influence,That now we look in vain for himOf the broad chest and stalwart limb!How could the strong-armed hero, thusDeceiving all, abandon us?His people so devoted see,Yet to the woods, a hermit, flee?How can he, wont our hearts to cheer,As a fond sire his children dear,--How can the pride of Raghu's raceFly from us to some desert place!

Here let us all for death prepare,
Or on the last great journey fare.  1
Of Ráma our dear lord bereft,What profit in our lives is left?Huge trunks of trees around us lie,With roots and branches sere and dry.Come let us set these logs on tireAnd throw our bodies on the pyre.What shall we speak? How can we sayWe followed Ráma on his way.The mighty chief whose arm is strong,Who sweetly speaks, who thinks no wrong?Ayodhyá's town with sorrow dumb,Without our lord will see us come,And hopeless misery will strikeElder, and child, and dame alike.Forth with that peerless chief we came,Whose mighty heart is aye the same:How, reft of him we love, shall weRetuming dare that town to see?'   Complaining thus with varied cryThey tossed their aged arms on high.And their sad hearts with grief were wrung.Like cows who sorrow for their young.A while they followed on the roadWhich traces of his chariot showed,But when at length those traces failed,A deep despair their hearts assailed.

p. 150
The chariot marks no more discerned,
The hopeless sages backward turned:'Ah, what is this? What can we more?Fate stops the way, and all is o'er.'With wearied hearts, in grief and shameThey took the road by which they came,And reached Ayodhyá's city, whereFrom side to side was naught but care.With troubled spirits quite cast downThey looked upon the royal town,And from their eyes, oppressed with woe,Their tears again began to flow.Of Ráma reft, the city woreNo look of beauty as before,Like a dull river or a lakeBy Garud robbed of every snake.Dark, dismal as the moonless sky,Or as a sea whose bed is dry,So sad, to every pleasure dead,They saw the town, disquieted.On to their houses, high and vast,Where stores of precious wealth were massed,The melancholy Bráhmans passed,   Their hearts with anguish cleft:Aloof from all, they came not nearTo stranger or to kinsman dear,Showing in faces blank and drear

   That not one joy was left.
Footnotes
149:1 The great pilgrimage to the Himalayas, in order 
to die there.
Next: Canto XLVIII.: The Women's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVIII.: THE WOMEN'S LAMENT.
When those who forth with Ráma went
Back to the town their steps had bent,It seemed that death had touched and chilledThose hearts which piercing sorrow filled.Each to his several mansion came,And girt by children and his dame,From his sad eyes the water shedThat o'er his cheek in torrents spread.All joy was fled: oppressed with caresNo bustling trader showed his wares.Each shop had lost its brilliant look,Each householder forbore to cook.No hand with joy its earnings told,None cared to win a wealth of gold,And scarce the youthful mother smiledTo see her first, her new-born child.In every house a woman wailed,And her returning lord assailedWith keen taunt piercing like the steelThat bids the tusked monster kneel;'What now to them is wedded dame,What house and home and dearest aim,Or son, or bliss, or gathered store,Whose eyes on Ráma look no more!

There is but one in all the earth,
One man alone of real worth,Lakshman, who follows, true and good,Ráma, with Sítá, through the wood,Made holy for all time we deemEach pool and fountain, lake and stream,If great Kakutstha's son shall chooseTheir water for his bath to use.Each forest, dark with lovely trees,Shall yearn Kakutstha's son to please;Each mountain peak and woody hill,Each mighty flood and mazy rill,Each rocky height, each shady groveWhere the blest feet of Ráma rove,Shall gladly welcome with the bestOf all they have their honoured guest.The trees that clustering blossoms bear,And bright-hued buds to gem their hair,The heart of Ráma shall delight,And cheer him on the breezy height.For him the upland slopes will showThe fairest roots and fruit that grow,And all their wealth before him flingEre the due hour of ripening.For him each earth-upholding hillIts crystal water shall distil,And all its floods shall be displayedIn many a thousand-hued cascade.Where Ráma stands is naught to fear,

No danger comes if he be near;
For all who live on him depend,The world's support, and lord, and friend.Ere in too distant wilds he stray,Let us to Ráma speed away,For rich reward on those will waitWho serve a prince of soul so great.We will attend on Sítá there;Be Raghu's son your special care.'The city dames, with grief distressed,Thus once again their lords addressed:'Ráma shall be your guard and guide,And Sítá will for us provide.For who would care to linger here,Where all is sad and dark and drear?Who, mid the mourners, hope for blissln a poor soulless town like this?If Queen Kaikeyí's treacherous sin,Our lord expelled, the kingdom win,We heed not sons or golden store,Our life itself we prize no more.If she, seduced by lust of sway,Her lord and son could cast away,Whom would she leave unharmed, the baseDefiler of her royal race?We swear it by our children dear,We will not dwell as servants here;If Queen Kaikeyí live to reign,We will not in her realm remain.

Bowed down by her oppressive hand,
The helpless, lordless, godless land,Cursed for Kaikeyí's guilt will fall,And swift destruction seize it all.
p. 151
For, Ráma forced from home to fly,The king his sire will surely die,And when the king has breathed his lastRuin will doubtless follow fast.Sad, robbed of merits, drug the cupAnd drink the poisoned mixture up,Or share the exiled Ráma's lot,Or seek some land that knows her not.No reason, but a false pretenceDrove Ráma, Sitá, Lakshman hence,And we to Bharat have been givenLike cattle to the shambles driven.
While in each house the women, pained
At loss of Ráma, still complained,Sank to his rest the Lord of Day,And night through all the sky held swayThe tires of worship all were cold,No text was hummed, no tale was told,And shades of midnight gloom came downEveloping the mournful town.Still, sick at heart, the women shed,

As for a son or husband fled,
For Ráma tears, disquieted:
No child was loved as he.
And all Ayodhyá, where the feast,Music, and song, and dance had ceased,   And merriment and glee,Where every merchant's store was closedThat erst its glittering wares exposed,Was like a dried up sea.
Next: Canto XLIX.: The Crossing of The Rivers.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIX.: THE CROSSING OF THE 
RIVERS.
Now Ráma, ere the night was fled,
O'er many a league of road had sped,Till, as his course he onward held,The morn the shades of night dispelled.The rites of holy dawn he paid,And all the country round surveyed.He saw, as still he hurried throughWth steeds which swift as arrows flew,Hamlets and groves with blossoms fair,And fields which showed the tillers' care,While from the clusteied dwellings nearThe words of peasants reached his ear:'Fie on our lord the king, whose soulIs yielded up to love's control!Fie on the vile Kaikevi! ShameOn that malicious sinful dame,Who, keenly bent on cruel deeds,No hounds of righht and virtue heeds,But with her wicked art has sentSo good a prince to banishment,Wi-o, tender-hearted, ruling wellHis senses in the woods to dwell.

Ah cruel king! his heart of steel
For his own son no love could feel,
Who with the sinless Ráma parts,
The darling of the people's hearts.'
   These words he heard the peasants say,
Who dwelt in hamlets by the way,And, lord of all the realm by right,Through Kosala pursued his flight.Through the auspicious flood, at last,Of Vesasruti's stream he passed,Aud onward to the place he spedBy Saint Agastya tenanted.Still on for many an hour he hied,And crossed the stream whose fooling tideRolls onward till she meets the sea,The herd-frequented GomatilBorne by his rapid horses o'er,He reached that river's further shore.And Syandiká's,whose svan-loved stream,Resounded with the peacock's scream.Then as he journeyed on his roadTo hvs Videhan bride he showedThe populous land which Manu oldTo King IKshvaku gave to hold.The glorious prince, the lord of menLooked on the charioteer, and thenVoiced like a wild swan, loud and clear.

He spake these words and bade him hear:
'When shall I, with returning feetMy father and my mother meet?When shall I lead the hunt once moreIn bloomy woods on Sarju's shore?Most eagerly I long to rideUrging the chase on Sarju's side.For royal saints have seen no blameIn this, the monarch's matchless game.'
Thus speeding on,--no reft or stay,--
Ikshvaku's son pursued his way.Oft his sweet voice the silence broke,And thus on varied themes he spoke.
Next: Canto L.: The Halt Under The Ingudí.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO L.: THE HALT UNDER THE 
INGUDÍ. 1
So through the wide and fair extent
Of Kosala the hero went.Then toward Ayodmá back he gazed,And cried, with supple hands upraised:
'Farewell, dear city, in this place,
Protected by Kakutatlm's race  
2
And Gods, who in thy temples dwell,And keep thine ancient citadel!I from his debt my sire will free,Thy well-loved towers again will see,
And, coming from my wild retreat,
My mother and my father meet.'
p. 152
Then burning grief inflamed his eye,As his right arm he raised on high,And, while hot tears his check bedewed,Addressed the mournful multitude:'By love and tender pity moved,

Your love for me you well have proved;
Now turn again with joy, and winSuccess in all your hands begin'
Before the high souled chief they bent,
With circling steps around him went,And then with bitter wailing, theyDeparted each his several way.Like the great sun engulfed by night,The hero sped beyond their sight,While still the people mourned his fateAnd wept aloud disconsolate.
The car-borne chieftain passed the bound
Of Kos'ala's delightful ground.Where grain and riches bless the land,And people give with liberal hand:A lovely realm unvexed by fear,Where countless shrines and stakes  
1 appear:
Where mango-groves and gardens grow,And streams of pleasant water flow:Where dwells content a well-fed race,And countless kine the meadows grace:Filled with the voice of praise and prayer:Each hamlet worth a monarch's care.Before him three-pathed Gangá rolledHer heavenly waters bright and cold;O'er her pure breast no weeds were spread,Her banks were hermit-visited.

The car-borne hero saw the tide
That ran with eddies multiplied,And thus the charioteer addressed:'Here on the bank to-day we rest.Not distant from the river, see!There grows a lofty IngudíWith blossoms thick on every spray:There rest we, charioteer, to-day.I on the queen of floods will gaze,Whose holy stream has highest praise,Where deer, and bird, and glittering snake,God, Daitya, bard their pastime take."
Sumantra, Lakshman gave assent,
And with the steeds they thither went.When Ráma reached the lovely tree,With Sítá and with Lakshman, heAlighted from the car: with speedSumantra loosed each weary steed,And hand to hand in reverence laid,Stood near to Ráma in the shade.Ráma's dear friend, renowned by fame,Who of Nisháda lineage came,Guha, the mighty chief, adoredThrough all the land as sovereign lord,Soon as he heard that prince renowned
Was resting on Nisháda ground,
Begirt by counsellor and peer

And many an honoured friend drew near.
Soon as the monarch came in view,Ráma and Lakshman toward him flew.Then Guha, at the sight distressed,His arms around the hero pressed,Laid both his hands upon his headBowed to those lotus feet, and said:'O Ráma, make thy wishes known,And be this kingdom as thine own.Who, mighty-armed, will ever seeA guest so dear as thou to me?'
He placed before him dainty fare
Of every flavour, rich and rare,Brought forth the gift for honoured guest,And thus again the chief addressed'Welcome, dear Prince, whose arms are strong;These lands and all to thee belong.Thy servants we, our lord art thou;Begin, good king, thine empire now.See, various food before thee placed,And cups to drink and sweets to tasteFor thee soft beds are hither borne,And for thy horses grass and corn.'
To Guha as he pressed and prayed,
Thus Raghu's son his answer made:''Twas aye thy care my heart to pleaseWith honour, love, and courtesies,

And friendship brings thee now to greet
Thy guest thus humbly on thy feet.'
Again the hero spake, as round
The king his shapely arms he wound:'Guha, I see that all is wellWith thee and those who with thee dwell;That health and bliss and wealth attendThy realm, thyself, and every friend.But all these friendly gifts of thine,Bound to refuse, I must decline.Grass, bark, and hide my only wear,And woodland roots and fruit my fare,On duty all my heart is set;I seek the woods, an anchoret.A little grass and corn to feedThe horses--this is all I need.So by this favour, King, aloneShall honour due to me be shown.For these good steeds who brought me hereAre to my sire supremely dear;And kind attention paid to theseWill honour me and highly please,'Then Guha quickly bade his trainGive water to the steeds, and grain,And Ráma, ere the night grew dark,Paid evening rites in dress of bark,And tasted water, on the strand,Drawn from the stream by Lakshman's hand.

And Lakshman with observance meet
Bathed his beloved brother's feet,
p. 153
Who rested with his Maithil spouse:Then sat him down 'neath distant boughs.And Guha with his bow sat nearTo Lakshman and the charioteer,And with the prince conversing keptHis faithful watch while Rama slept.As Das'aratha's glorious heir,Of lofty soul and wisdom rare,Reclining with his Sítá there   Beside the river lay--He who no troubles e'er had seen,Whose life a life of bliss had been--That night beneath the branches green   Passed pleasantly away.
Footnotes
151:1 Known to Europeans as the Goemtee.
151:2 A tree, commonly called Ingua.

152:1 Sacrificial posts to which the victims were tied.
Next: Canto LI.: Lakshman's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LI.: LAKSHMAN'S LAMENT.
As Lakshman still his vigil held
By unaffected love impelled,Guha, whose heart the sight distressed,With words like these the prince addressed:'Beloved youth, this pleasant bedWas brought for thee, for thee is spread;On this, my Prince, thine eyelids close,And heal fatigue with sweet repose.My men are all to labour trained,But hardship thou hast ne'er sustained.All we this night our watch will keepAnd guard Kakutstha's son asleep,In all the world there breathes not oneMore dear to me than Raghu's son.The words I speak, heroic youth.Are true: I swear it by my truth.Through his dear grace supreme renownWill, so I trust, my wishes crown.So shall my life rich store obtainOf merit, blest with joy and gain.While Raghu's son and Sítá lieEntranced in happy slumber, IWill, with my trusty bow in hand,Guard my dear friend with all my band.

To me, who oft these forests range,
ls naught therein or new or strange.We could with equal might opposeA four-fold army led by foes.'
Then royal Lakshman made reply:
'With thee to stand as guardian nigh,Whose faithful soul regards the right,Fearless we well might rest to-night.But how, when Ráma lays his headWith Sítá on his lowly bed,--How can I sleep? how can I careFor life, or aught that's bright and fair?Behold the conquering chief, whose mightIs match for Gods and fiends in fight;With Sítá now he rests his beadAsleep on grass beneath him spread.Won by devotion, text, and prayer.And many a rite performed with care.Chief of our father's sons he shinesWell marked, like him, with favouring signs.Brief, brief the monarch's life will beNow his dear son is forced to flee;And quickly will the widowed stateMourn for her lord disconsolate.Each mourner there has wept her fill;The cries of anguish now are still:In the king's hall each dame, o'ercomeWith wearines of woe is dumb.

This first sad night of grief, I ween,
Will do to death each sorrowing queen:Scarce is Kaus'alyá left alive;My mother, too, can scarce survive.If when her heart is fain to break,She lingers for S'atrughna's sake,Kaus'alyá mother of the chief,Must sink beneath the chilling grief,That town which countless thousands fill,Whose hearts with love of Ráma thrill,--The world's delight, so rich and fair,--Grieved for the king, his death will share.The hopes he fondly cherished, crossed.Ayodhyá's throne to Rama lost,--With mournful cries. Too late, too late!The king my sire will meet his fate.And when my sire has passed away,Most happy in their lot are they,Allowed, with every pious care,Part in his funeral rites to bear.And O, may we with joy at last,--These years of forest exile past,--Turn to Ayodhyá's town to dwellWith him who keeps his promise well.'
While thus the hero mighty-souled,
In wild lament his sorrow told,Faint with the load that on him lay,The hours of darkness passed away.

As thus the prince, impelled by zeal
For his loved brother, prompt to feelStrong yearnings for the people's weal,   His words of truth outspake,King Guha grieved to see his woe.Heart-stricken, gave his tears to flow,Tormented by the common blow,   Sad, as a wounded snake.
Next: Canto LII.: The Crossing of Gangá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LII.: THE CROSSING OF GANGÁ.
Soon as the shades of night had fled,
Uprising from his lowly bed,Ráma the famous, broad of chest,His brother Lakshman thus addressed:'Now swift upsprings the Lord of Light,And fled, is venerable night,
p. 154
That dark-winged bird the Koïl nowIs calling from the topmost bough,And sounding from the thicket nighIs heard the peacock's early cry,Come, cross the flood that seeks the sea,The swiftly flowing Jáhnaví.'  
1
   King Guha heard his speech, agreed,And called his minister with speed:'A boat,' he cried, 'swift, strong, and fair,With rudder, oars, and men, prepare,And place it ready by the shoreTo bear the pilgrims quickly o'er.'Thus Guha spake: his followers all

Bestirred them at their master's call;
Then told the king that ready mannedA gay boat waited near the strand.Then Guha, hand to hand applied.With reverence thus to Ráma cried:'The boat is ready by the shore:How, tell me, can I aid thee more?O lord of men, it waits for theeTo cross the flood that seeks the sea,O godlike keeper of thy vow,Embark: the boat is ready now.'
   Then Ráma, lord of glory high,
Thus to King Guha. made reply:'Thanks for thy gracious care, my lord:Now let the gear be placed on board.'Each bow-armed chief, in mail encased,Bound sword and quiver to his waist,And then with Sítá near them hiedDown the broad river's shelving side.Then with raised palms the charioteer,In lowly reverence drawing near,Cried thus to Ráma good and true:'Now what remains for me to do?'   With his right hand, while answering     The hero touched his friend:   'Go back,' he said, 'and on the king     With watchful care attend.Thus far, Sumantra, thou wast guide;

Now to Ayodhyá turn,' he cried:
'Hence seek we leaving steeds and car,On foot the wood that stretches far.'
Sumantra, when, with grieving heart,
He heard the hero bid him part,Thus to the bravest of the brave,Ikshváku's son, his answer gave:'In all the world men tell of naught,To match thy deed, by heroes wrought--Thus with thy brother and thy wifeThrall-like to lead a forest life.No meet reward of fruit repaysThy holy lore, thy saintlike days,Thy tender soul, thy love of truth,If woe like this afflicts thy youth.Thou, roaming under forest boughs
With thy dear brother and thy spouse
Shalt richer meed of glory gainThan if three worlds confessed thy reign.Sad is our fate, O Ráma: we,Abandoned and repelled by thee,Must serve as thralls Kaikeyí's will,Imperious, wicked, born to ill.'
Thus cried the faithful charioteer,
As Raghu's son, in rede his peer,Was fast departing on his road,--

And long his tears of anguish flowed.
But Ráma, when those tears were driedHis lips with water purified,And in soft accents, sweet and clear,Again addressed the charioteer:'I find no heart, my friend, like thine,So faithful to Ikshváku's line.Still first in view this object keep,That ne'er for me my sire may weep.For he, the world's far-ruling king,Is old, and wild with sorrow's sting;With love's great burthen worn and weak:Deem this the cause that thus I speakWhate'er the high-souled king decreesHis loved Kaikeyí's heart to please,Yea, be his order what it may,Without demur thou must obey,For this alone great monarchs reign,That ne'er a wish be formed in vain.Then, O Sumantra, well provideThat by no check the king be tried:Nor let his heart in sorrow pine:This care, my faithful friend, be thineThe honoured king my father greet,And thus for me my words repeatTo him whose senses are controlled,Untired till now by grief, and old;
I, Sítá, Lakshman sorrow not,

O Monarch, for our altered lot:
The same to us, if here we roam,Or if Ayodhyá be our home,The fourteen years will quickly fly,The happy hour will soon be nighWhen thou, my lord, again shalt seeLakshman, the Maithlí dame, and me.Thus having soothed, O charioteer,My father and my mother dear,Let all the queens my message learn.But to Kaikeyí chiefly turn,With loving blessings from the three,From Lakshman, Sítá, and from me,My mother, Queen Kausalyá, greetWith reverence to her sacred feet.And add this prayer of mine: 'O King;Send quickly forth and Bharat bring,And set him on the royal throneWhich thy decree has made his own.When he upon the throne is placed,When thy fond arms are round him laced.Thine aged heart will cease to acheWith bitter pangs for Ráma's sake.'
p. 155
And say to Bharat: 'See thou treatThe queens with all observance meet:What care the king receives, the same

Show thou alike to every dame.
Obedience to thy father's willWho chooses thee the throne to fill,Will earn for thee a store of blissBoth in the world to come and this.'
Thus Ráma bade Sumantra go
With thoughtful care instructed so.Sumantra all his message heard,And spake again, by passion stirred:'O, should deep feeling mar in aughtThe speech by fond devotion taught,Forgive whate'er I wildly speak:My love is strong, my tongue is weak.How shall I, if deprived of thee,Return that mournful town to see:Where sick at heart the people areBecause their Ráma roams afar.Woe will be theirs too deep to brookWhen on the empty car they look,As when from hosts, whose chiefs are slain,One charioteer comes home again.This very day, I ween, is foodForsworn by all the multitude,Thinking that thou, with hosts to aid,Art dwelling in the wild wood's shade.The great despair, the shriek of woeThey uttered when they saw thee go.Will, when I come with none beside,

A hundred-fold be multiplied.
How to Kaus'alyá can I say:'O Queen, I took thy son away,And with thy brother left him well:Weep not for him; thy woe dispel?'So false a tale I cannot frame,Yet how speak truth and grieve the dame?How shall these horses, fleet and bold,Whom not a hand but mine can hold,Bear others, wont to whirl the carWherein Ikshváku's children are!Without thee, Prince, I cannot, no,I cannot to Ayodhyá go.Then deign, O Ráma, to relent,And let me share thy banishment.But if no prayers can move thy heart,If thou wilt quit me and depart,The flames shall end my car and me,Deserted thus and reft of thee.In the wild wood when foes are near,When dangers check thy vows austere,Borne in my car will I attend.All danger and all care to end.For thy dear sake I love the skillThat guides the steed and curbs his will:And soon a forest life will beAs pleasant, for my love of thee.And if these horses near thee dwell,And serve thee in the forest well,

They, for their service, will not miss
The due reward of highest bliss.Thine orders, as with thee I stray.Will I with heart and head obey,Prepared, for thee, without a sigh,To lose Ayodhyá or the sky.As one denied with hideous sin,I never more can pass withinAyodhyá, city of our king,Unless beside me thee I bring.One wish is mine, I ask no more,That, when thy banishment is o'erI in my car may bear my lord,Triumphant, to his home restored.The fourteen years, if spent with thee.Will swift as light-winged moments flee;But the same years, without thee told,Were magnified a hundred-fold.Do not, kind lord, thy servant leave,Who to his master's son would cleave,And the same path with him pursue,Devoted, tender, just and true.'
Again, again Sumantra made
His varied plaint, and wept and prayed.Him Raghu's son, whose tender breastFelt for his servants, thus addressed:O faithful servant, well my heartKnows how attached and true thou art.

Hear thou the words I speak, and know
Why to the town I bid thee go.Soon as Kaikeyí, youngest queen,Thy coming to the town has seen,No doubt will then her mind oppressThat Ráma roams the wilderness.And so the dame, her heart contentWith proof of Ráma's banishment.Will doubt the virtuous king no moreAs faithless to the oath he swore.Chief of my cares is this, that she,Youngest amid the queens, may seeBharat her son securely reignO'er rich Ayodhyá's wide domain.For mine and for the monarch's sakeDo thou thy journey homeward take,And, as I bade, repeat each wordThat from my lips thou here hast heard.'
Thus spake the prince, and strove to cheer
The sad heart of the charioteer,And then to royal Guha saidThese words most wise and spirited:'Guha, dear friend, it is not meetThat people throng my calm retreat:For I must live a strict recluse,And mould my life by hermits' use.I now the ancient rule acceptBy good ascetics gladly kept.

I go: bring fig-tree juice that I
In matted coils my hair may tie.'
Quick Guha hastened to produce,
For the king's son, that sacred juice.Then Ráma of his long locks made,And Lakshman's too, the hermit braid.
p. 156
And the two royal brothers thereWith coats of bark and matted hair,Transformed in lovely likeness stoodTo hermit saints who love the wood.So Ráma, with his brother bold,A pious anchorite enrolled,Obeyed the vow which hermits take,And to his friend, King Guha, spake:'May people, treasure, army share,And fenced forts, thy constant care:Attend to all: supremely hardThe sovereign's task, to watch and guard.'
Ikshváku's son, the good and brave,
This last farewell to Guha gave,And then, with Lakshman and his bride,Determined, on his way he hied.Soon as he viewed, upon the shore,The bark prepared to waft them o'er

Impetuous Gangá's rolling tide,
To Lakshman thus the chieftain cried:'Brother, embark; thy hand extend,Thy gentle aid to Sítá lend:With care her trembling footsteps guide,And place the lady by thy side.'When Lakshman heard, prepared to aidHis brother's words he swift obeyed.Within the bark he placed the dame,Then to her side the hero came.Next Lakshman's elder brother, lordOf brightest glory, when on board,Breathing a prayer for blessings, meetFor priest or warrior to repeat,Then he and car-borne Lakshman bent,Well-pleased, their heads, most reverent,Their hands, with Sítá, having dipped,As Scripture bids, and water sipped,Farewell to wise Sumantra said,And Guha, with the train he led.So Ráma took, on board, his stand,And urged the vessel from the land.Then swift by vigorous arms impelledHer onward course the vessel held,And guided by the helmsman throughThe dashing waves of Gangá flew.Half way across the flood they came,When Sítá, free from spot and blame,Her reverent hands together pressed,

The Goddess of the stream addressed:
'May the great chieftain here who springsFrom Das'aratha, best of kings,Protected by thy care, fulfilHis prudent father's royal will.When in the forest he has spentHis fourteen years of banishment,With his dear brother and with meHis home again my lord shall see,Returning on that blissful day.I will to thee mine offerings pay,Dear Queen, whose waters gently flow,Who canst all blessed gifts bestow.For, three-pathed Queen, though wandering here,Thy waves descend from Brahmá's sphere,Spouse of the God o'er floods supreme,Though rolling here thy glorious stream.To thee, fair Queen, my head shall bend,To thee shall hymns of praise ascend,When my brave lord shall turn again,And, joyful, o'er his kingdom reign.To win thy grace, O Queen divine,A hundred thousand fairest kine,And precious robes and finest mealAmong the Bráhmans will I deal.A hundred jars of wine shall flow,When to my home, O Queen, I go;With these, and flesh, and corn, and rice,Will I, delighted, sacrifice.

Each hallowed spot, each holy shrine
That stands on these fair shores of thine,Each fane and altar on thy banksShall share my offerings and thanks.With me and Lakshman, free from harm,May he the blameless, strong of arm,Reseek Ayodhyá from the wild,O blameless Lady undefiled!'
As, praying for her husband's sake,
The faultless dame to Gangá spake,To the right bank the vessel flewWith her whose heart was right and true.Soon as the bark had crossed the wave,The lion leader of the brave,Leaving the vessel on the strand,With wife and brother leapt to land.Then Ráma thus the prince addressedWho filled with joy Sumitrá's breast:'Be thine alike to guard and aidIn peopled spot, in lonely shade.Do thou, Sumitrá's son, precede:Let Sítá walk where thou shalt lead.Behind you both my place shall be,To guard the Maithil dame and thee.For she, to woe a stranger yet,No toil or grief till now has met;The fair Videhan will assayThe pains of forest life to-day.

To-day her tender feet must tread
Rough rocky wilds around her spread:No tilth is there, no gardens grow,No crowding people come and go.'
The hero ceased: and Lakshman led
Obedient to the words he said:And Sítá followed him, and thenCame Raghu's pride, the lord of men.With Sítá walking o'er the sandThey sought the forest, bow in hand,But still their lingering glances threwWhere yet Sumantra stood in view.Sumantra, when his watchful eyeThe royal youths no more could spy,Turned from the spot whereon he stoodHomeward with Guha from the wood.
p. 157
Still on the brothers forced their wayWhere sweet birds sang on every spray,Though scarce the eye a path could findMid flowering trees where creepers twinedFar on the princely brothers pressed,And stayed their feet at length to restBeneath a fig tree's mighty shadeWith countless pendent shoots displayed.Reclining there a while at ease,

They saw, not far, beneath fair trees
A lake with many a lotus brightThat bore the name of Lovely Sight.Ráma his wife's attention drew,And Lakshman's, to the charming view:'Look, brother, look how fair the floodGlows with the lotus, flower and bud.'
They drank the water fresh and clear,
And with their shafts they slew a deer.A fire of boughs they made in haste,And in the flame the meat they placed.So Raghu's sons with Sítá sharedThe hunter's meal their hands prepared,Then counselled that the spreading treeTheir shelter and their home should be.
Footnotes
154:1 Daughter of Jahnu, a name of the Ganges, See p. 
55.
Next: Canto LIII.: Ráma's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIII.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.
When evening rites were duly paid,
Reclined beneath the leafy shade,To Lakshman thus spake Ráma, bestOf those who glad a people's breast:'Now the first night has closed the dayThat saw us from our country stray,And parted from the charioteer;Yet grieve not thou, my brother dear.Henceforth by night, when others sleep,Must we our careful vigil keep,Watching for Sítá's welfare thus,For her dear life depends on us.Bring me the leaves that lie around,And spread them here upon the ground,That we on lowly beds may lie,And let in talk the night go by.'
So on the ground with leaves o'erspread,
He who should press a royal bed,Ráma with Lakshman thus conversed,And many a pleasant tale rehearsed:'This night the king,' he cried, 'alas!In broken sleep will sadly pass.Kaikeyí now content should be,

For mistress of her wish is she.
So fiercely she for empire yearns,That when her Bharat home returns,She in her greed, may even bringDestruction on our lord the king.What can he do, in feeble eld,Reft of all aid and me expelled,His soul enslaved by love, a thrallObedient to Kaikeyí's call?As thus I muse upon his woeAnd all his wisdoms overthrow,Love is, methinks, of greater mightTo stir the heart than gain and right.For who, in wisdom's lore untaught.Could by a beauty's prayer be boughtTo quit his own obedient son,Who loves him, as my sire has done!Bharat, Kaikeyí's child, aloneWill, with his wife, enjoy the throne,And blissfully his rule maintainO'er happy Kos'ala's domain.To Bharat's single lot will fallThe kingdom and the power and all,When fails the king from length of days,And Ráma in the forest strays.Whoe'er, neglecting right and gain,Lets conquering love his soul enchain,To him, like Das'aratha's lot,Comes woe with feet that tarry not.

Methinks at last the royal dame,
Dear Lakshman, has secured her aim,To see at once her husband dead,Her son enthroned, and Ráma fled.Ah me! I fear, lest borne awayBy frenzy of success, she slayKaus'alyá, through her wicked hateOf me, bereft, disconsolate;Or her who aye for me has strivenSumitrá, to devotion given.Hence, Lakshman, to Avodhyá speed,Returning in the hour of need.With Sítá I my steps will bendWhere Dandak's mighty woods extend.No guardian has Kaus'alyá now:O, be her friend and guardian thou.Strong hate may vile Kaikeyí leadTo many a base unrighteous deed,Treading my mother 'neath her feetWhen Bharat holds the royal seat.Sure in some antenatal timeWere children, by Kausalyá's crime.Torn from their mothers' arms away,And hence she mourns this evil day.She for her child no toil would spareTending me long with pain and care;Now in the hour of fruitage sheHas lost that son, ah, woe is me.O Lakshman, may no matron e'er

A son so doomed to sorrow bear
As I, my mother's heart who rendWith anguish that can never end.The Sáriká,  
1 methinks, possessed
More love than glows in Ráma's breast.Who, as the tale is told to us.Addressed the stricken parrot thus:
p. 158
'Parrot, the capturer's talons tear,While yet alone thou flutterest there.Before his mouth has closed on me:'So cried the bird, herself to free.Reft of her son, in childless woe,My mother's tears for ever flow:Ill-fated, doomed with grief to strive.What aid can she from me derive?Pressed down by care, she cannot riseFrom sorrow's flood wherein she lies.In righteous wrath my single armCould, with my bow, protect from harmAyodhyá's town and all the earth:But what is hero prowess worth?Lest breaking duty's law I sin,And lose the heaven I strive to win,The forest life today I choose,And kingly state and power refuse.'

Thus mourning in that lonely spot
The troubled chief bewailed his lot,And filled with tears, his eyes ran o'er;Then silent sat, and spake no more.To him, when ceased his loud lament,Like fire whose brilliant might is spent.Or the great sea when sleeps the wave,Thus Lakshman consolation gave:'Chief of the brave who bear the bow,E'en now Ayodhyá, sunk in woe,By thy departure reft of lightIs gloomy as the moonless night.Unfit it seems that thou, O chief.Shouldst so afflict thy soul with grief,So with thou Sítá's heart consignTo deep despair as well as mine.Not I, O Raghu's son, nor sheCould live one hour deprived of thee:We were, without thine arm to save,Like fish deserted by the wave.Although my mother dear to meet,S'atrughna and the king, were sweet,On them, or heaven, to feed mine eyeWere nothing, if thou wert not by.'
Sitting at ease, their glances fell
Upon the beds, constructed well.And there the sons of virtue laidTheir limps beneath the fig tree's shade.

Footnotes
157:1 The Mainá or Gracula religiosa, a favourite cage-
bird, easily taught to talk.
Next: Canto LIV.: Bharadvája's Hermitage.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIV.: BHARADVÁJA'S 
HERMITAGE.
So there that night the heroes spent
Under the boughs that o'er them bent,And when the sun his glory spread,Upstarting, from the place they sped.On to that spot they made their way,Through the dense wood that round them lay,Where Yamuná's  
1 swift waters glide
To blend with Gangá's holy tide.Charmed with the prospect ever newThe glorious heroes wandered throughFull many a spot of pleasant ground,Rejoicing as they gazed around,With eager eye and heart at ease,On countless sorts of flowery trees.And now the day was half-way spedWhen thus to Lakshman Ráma said:'There, there, dear brother, turn thine eyes;See near Prayág  
1b that smoke arise:
The banner of our Lord of FlamesThe dwelling of some saint proclaims.Near to the place our steps we bend

Where Yamuná and Gangá blend.
I hear and mark the deafening roarWhen chafing floods together pour.See, near us on the ground are leftDry logs, by labouring woodmen cleft,And the tall trees, that blossom nearSaint Bharadvája's home, appear.'
The bow-armed princes onward passed,
And as the sun was sinking fastThey reached the hermit's dwelling, setNear where the rushing waters met.The presence of the warrior scaredThe deer and birds as on he fared,And struck them vith unwonted awe:Then Bharadvája's cot they saw.The high-souled hermit soon they foundGirt by his dear disciples round:Calm saint, whose vows had well been wrought,Whose fervent rites keen sight had bought.Duly had flames of worship blazedWhen Ráma on the hermit gazed:His suppliant hands the hero raised,Drew nearer to the holy manWith his companions, and began,Declaring both his name and raceAnd why they sought that distant place;'Saint, Das'aratha's children we,Ráma and Lakshman, come to thee.

This my good wife from Janak springs.
The best of fair Videha's kings;Through lonely wilds, a faultless dame,To this pure grove with me she came.My younger brother follows stillMe banished by my father's will:Sumitrá's son, bound by a vow,--He roams the wood beside me now.Sent by my father forth to rove,We seek, O Saint, some holy grove,Where lives of hermits we may lead,And upon fruits and berries feed.'
When Bharadvája, prudent-souled,
Had heard the prince his tale unfold,Water he bade them bring, a bull,And honour-gifts in dishes full,
p. 159
And drink and food of varied taste,Berries and roots, before him placed,And then the great ascetic showedA cottage for the guests' abode.The saint these honours gladly paidTo Ráma who had thither strayed,Then compassed sat by birds and deerAnd many a hermit resting near.The prince received the service kind,

And sat him down rejoiced in mind.
Then Bharadvája silence broke,And thus the words of duty spoke:'Kakutstha's royal son, that thouHadst sought this grove I knew ere now.Mine ears have heard thy story, sentWithout a sin to banishment.Behold, O Prince, this ample spaceNear where the mingling floods embrace,Holy, and beautiful, and clear:Dwell with us, and be happy here.'
By Bharadvája thus addressed,
Ráma whose kind and tender breastAll living things would bless and save,In gracious words his answer gave:
'My honoured lord, this tranquil spot,
Fair home of hermits, suits me not:For all the neighbouring people hereWill seek us when they know me near:With eager wish to look on me,And the Videhan dame to see,A crowd of rustics will intrudeUpon the holy solitude.Provide, O gracious lord, I pray,Some quiet home that lies away,Where my Videhan spouse may dwellTasting the bliss deserved so well.'

The hermit heard the prayer he made:
A while in earnest thought he stayed.And then in words like these expressedHis answer to the chief's request:'Ten leagues away there stands a hillWhere thou mayvst live, if such thy will:A holy mount, exceeding fair;Great saints have made their dwelling there:There great Langúrs  
1 in thousands play,
And bears amid the thickets stray;Wide-known by Chitrakúta's name,It rivals Gandhamádan's  
2 fame.
Long as the man that hill who seeksGazes upon its sacred peaks,To holy things his soul he givesAnd pure from thought of evil lives.There, while a hundred autumns fled,Has many a saint with hoary headSpent his pure life, and won the prize,By deep devotion, in the skies:
Best home, I ween, if such retreat,
Far from the ways of men, be sweet:Or let thy yewre of exile fleeHere in this hermitage with me.'
Thus Bharadvája spake, and trained
In lore of duty, entertained

The princes and the dame, and pressed
Hie friendly gifts on every guest.
Thus to Prayág the hero went,
Thus saw the saint preeminent,And varied speeches heard and said:Then holy night o'er heaven was spread.And Ráma took, by toil oppressed,With Sitá and his brother, rest;And so the night, with sweet content,In Bharadvája's grove was spent.But when the dawn dispelled the night,Ráma approached the anchorite,And thus addressed the holy sireWhose glory shone like kindled fire:'Well have we spent, O truthful Sage,The night within thy hermitage:Now let my lord his guests permitFor their new home his grove to quit.'
Then, as he saw the morning break,
Ih answer Bharadvája spake:'Go forth to Chitrakúta's hill,Where berries grow, and sweets distil:Full well, I deem, that home will suitThee, Ráma, strong and resolute.Go forth, and Chitrakúta seek,Famed mountain of the Varied Peak.In the wild woods that gird him round

All creatures of the chase are found:
Thou in the glades shalt see appearVast herds of elephants and deer.With Si'ta there shalt thou delightTo gaze upon the woody height;There with expanding heart to lookOn river, table-land, and brook,And see the foaming torrent raveImpetuous from the mountain cave.Auspicious hill! where all day longThe lapwing's cry, the Koil's songMake all who listen gay:Where all is fresh and fair to see,Where elephants and deer roam free,There, as a hermit, stay.'
Footnotes
158:1 The Jumna.
158:1b The Hindu name of Allahabad.
159:1 The Langúr is a large monkey.
159:2 A mountain said to lie to the east of Meru.

Next: Canto LV.: The Passage of Yamuná.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LV.: THE PASSAGE OF YAMUNÁ.
The princely tamers of their foes
Thus passed the night in calm repose,Then to the hermit having bentWith reverence, on their way they went.High favour Rharadvája showed.And blessed them ready for the road.
p. 160
With such fond looks as fathers throwOn their own sons, before they go.Then spake the saint with glory brightTo Ráma peerless in his might:'First, lords of men, direct your feetWhere Yamuna' and Gangá meet;Then to the swift Kalindi  
1 go,
Whose westward waves to Gangá flow.When thou shalt see her lovely shoreWorn by their feet who hasten o'er,Then, Raghu's son, a raft prepare.And cross the Sun born river there.Upon her farther bank a tree,Near to the landing wilt thou see.The blessed source of varied gifts,

There her green boughs that Eig tree lifts:
A tree where countless birds abide,Bv Syáma's name known far and wide.Sitá, revere that holy shade:There be thy prayers for blessing prayed.Thence for a league your way pursue,And a dark wood shall meet your view,Where tall bamboos their foliage show,The Gum tree and the Jujube grow.To Chitrakúta have I oftTrodden that path so smooth and soft,Where burning woods no traveller scare,But all is pleasant, green, and fair.'
When thus the guests their road had learned,
Back to his cot the hermit turned,And Ráma, Lakshman, Sitá paidTheir reverent thanks for courteous aid.Thus Ráma spake to Lakshman, whenThe saint had left the lords of men:'Great store of bliss in sooth is oursOn whom his love the hermit showers.'As each to other wisely talked,The lion lords together walkedOn to Kálindi's woody shore;And gentle Sita went before.They reached that flood, whose waters fleeWith rapid current to the sea;Their minds a while to thought they gave

And counselled how to cross the wave.
At length, with logs together laid,A mighty raft the brothers made.Then dry bamboos across were tied,And grass was spread from side to side.And the great hero Lakshman broughtCane and Rose Apple boughs and wrought,Trimming the branches smooth and neat,For Sitá's use a pleasant seat.And Ráma placed thereon his dameTouched with a momentary shame,Resembling in her glorious mienAll thought surpassing Fortune's QueenThen Ráma hastened to dispose.
Each in its place, the skins and bows,
And by the fair Videhan laidThe coats, the ornaments, and spade.When Sitá thus was set on board,And all their gear was duly stored,The heroes each with vigorous hand,Pushed off the raft and left the land.When half its way the raft had made,Thus Sitá to Kálindi prayed:'Goddess, whose flood I traverse now,Grant that my lord may keep his vow.For thee shall bleed a thousand kine,A hundred jars shall pour their wine,When Ráma sees that town again

Where old Ikshváku's children reign."
Thus to Kálindi's stream she sued
And prayed in suppliant attitude.Then to the river's bank the dame,Fervent in supplication, came.They left the raft that brought them o'er,And the thick wood that clothed the shore,And to the Fig-tree Syama madeTheir way, so cool with verdant shade.Then Sitá viewed that best of trees,And reverent spake in words like these:'Hail,hail, O mighty tree! AllowMy husband to complete his vow;Let us returning, I entreat,Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá meet.'Then with her hands together placedAround the tree she duly paced.When Ráma saw his blameless spouseA suppliant under holy boughs,The gentle darling of his heart,He thus to Lakshman spake apart:'Brother, by thee our way be led;Let Sitá close behind thee tread:I, best of men, will grasp my bow,And hindmost of the three will go.What fruits soe'er her fancy take,Or flowers half hidden in the brake,For Janak's child forget not thou

To gather from the brake or bough."
Thus on they fared. The tender dame
Asked Ráma, as they walked, the nameOf every shrub that blossoms bore,Creeper, and tree unseen before:And Lakshman fetched, at Sitá's prayer,Boughs of each tree with clusters fair.Then Janak's daughter joyed to seeThe sand-discoloured river flee,Where the glad cry of many a bird,The sa'ras and the swan, was heard.A league the brothers travelled throughThe forest noble game they slew:Beneath the trees their meal they dressedAnd sat them down to eat and rest.A while in that delightful shadeWhere elephants unnumbered strayed.Where peacocks screamed and monkeys played.
p. 161
   They wandered with delight.Then by the river's side they foundA pleaaant spot of level ground,Where all was smooth and fair around,   Their lodging for the night.

Footnotes
160:1 Another name of the Jumna, daughter of the Sun.
Next: Canto LVI.: Chitrakuta.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVI.: CHITRAKUTA.
Then Ráma, when the morning rose,
Called Lakshman gently from repose:'Awake, the pleasant voices hearOf forest birds that warble near.Scourge of thy foes, no longer stay;The hour is come to speed away.'   The slumbering prince unclosed his eyesWhen thus his brother bade him rise,Compelling, at the timely cry,Fatigue, and sleep, and rest to fly.The brothers rose and Sítá too;Pure water from the stream they drew,Paid morning rites, then followed stillThe road to Chitrakúta's hill.Then Ráma as he took the roadWith Lakshman, while the morning, glowed,To the Videhan lady cried,Sítá the fair, the lotus-eyed:'Look round thee, dear; each flowery treeTouched with the fire of morning see:The Kins'uk, now the Frosts are fled,--How glorious with his wreaths of red!The Bel-trees see, so loved of men,Hanging their boughs in every glen.

O'erburthened with their fruit and flowers:
A plenteous store of food is ours.   See, Lakshman, in the leafy trees,     Where'er they make their home.   Down hangs, the work of labouring bees     The ponderous honeycomb.   In the fair wood before us spread     The startled wild-cock cries:   Hark, where the flowers are soft to tread,     The peacock's voice replies.   Where elephants are roaming free,     And sweet birds' songs are loud,   The glorious Chitrakúta see:     His peaks are in the cloud.   On fair smooth ground he stands displayed,     Begirt by many a tree:   O brother, in that holy shade     How happy shall we be!' 
1
Then Ráma, Lakshman, Sitá, eachSpoke raising suppliant hands this speechTo him, in woodland dwelling met,Válmiki, ancient anchoret:'O Saint, this mountain takes the mind,With creepers, trees of every kind,Vith fruit and roots abounding thus,A pleasant life it offers us:Here for a while we fain would stay,And pass a season blithe and gay.'

   Then the great saint, in duty trained,
With honour gladly entertained:He gave his guests a welcome fair,And bade them sit and rest them there,Ráma of mighty arm and chestHis faithful Lakshman then addressed:'Brother, bring hither from the woodSelected timber strong and good,And build therewith a little cot;My heart rejoices in the spotThat lies beneath the mountain's side,Remote, with water well supplied.'Sumitrá's son his words obeyed,Brought many a tree, and deftly made,With branches in the forest cut,As Ráma bade, a leafy hut.Then Ráma, when the cottage stoodFair, firmly built, and walled with wood,To Lakshman spake, whose eager mindTo do his brother's will inclined:'Now, Lakshman as our cot is made,Must sacrifice be duly paidBy us, for lengthened life who hope,With venison of the antelope.Away, O bright-eyed Lakshman, speed:Struck by thy bow a deer must bleed:As Scripture bids, we must not slightThe duty that commands the rite.'   Lakshman, the chief whose arrows laid

His foemen low, his word obeyed;
And Ráma thus again addressedThe swift performer of his hest:'Prepare the venison thou hast shot,To sacrifice for this our cot.Haste, brother dear, for this the hour,And this the day of certain power.'Then glorious Lakshman took the buckHis arrow in the wood had struck;Bearing his mighty load he came,And laid it in the kindled flame.
p. 162
Soon as he saw the meat was done,And that the juices ceased to runFrom the broiled carcass, Lakshman thenSpoke thus to Ráma best of men:'The carcass of the buck, entire,Is ready dressed upon the fire.Now be the sacred rites begunTo please the God, thou godlike one.'
Ráma the good, in ritual trained,
Pure from the bath, with thoughts restrained,Hasted those verses to repeatWhich make the sacrifice complete.The hosts celestial came in view,And Ráma to the cot withdrew,

While a sweet sense of rapture stole
Through the unequalled hero's soul.He paid the Vis'vedevas  
1 due.
And Rudra's right, and Vishnu's too,Nor wonted blessings, to protectTheir new-built home, did he neglect.With voice repressed he breathed the prayer,Bathed duly in the river fair,And gave good offerings that removeThe stain of sin, as texts approve.And many an altar there he made,And shrines, to suit the holy shade,All decked with woodland chaplets sweet,And fruit and roots and roasted meat,With muttered prayer, as texts require,Water, and grass and wood and fire.So Ráma, Lakshman, Sítá paidTheir offerings to each God and shade,And entered then their pleasant cotThat bore fair signs of happy lot.They entered, the illustrious three,The well-set cottage, fair to see,Roofed with the leaves of many a tree,   And fenced from wind and rain;So, at their Father Brahmá's call,The Gods of heaven, assembling all,To their own glorious council hall   Advance in shining train.So, resting on that lovely hill,

Near the fair lily-covered rill,
   The happy prince forgot,Surrounded by the birds and deer,The woe, the longing, and the fear   That gloom the exile's lot.
Footnotes
161:1 'We have often looked on that green hill: it is the 
holiest spot of that sect of the Hindu faith who devote 
themselves to this incarnation, of Vishnu. The whole neighbourhood is Ráma's country. Every headland has some legend, every cavern is connected with his name; some of the wild fruits are still called Stáphal, being the reputed food of the exile. Thousands and thousands annually visit the spot, and round the hill is a raised foot-path, on which the devotee, with naked feet, treads full of pious awe.' Calcutta Review, Vol. XXIII.
Next: Canto LVII.: Sumantra's Return.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVII.: SUMANTRA'S RETURN.
When Ráma reached the southern bank,
King Guha's heart with sorrow sank:
He with Sumantra talked, and spent
With his deep sorrow, homeward went.Sumantra, as the king decreed,Yoked to the car each noble steed,And to Ayodhyá's city spedWith his sad heart disquieted.On lake and brook and scented groveHis glances fell, as on he drove:City and village came in viewAs o'er the road his coursers flew.On the third day the charioteer,When now the hour of night was near,Came to Ayodhyá's gate, and foundThe city all in sorrow drowned.To him, in spirit quite cast down,Forsaken seemed the silent town,And by the rush of grief oppressedHe pondered in his mournful breast:'Is all Ayodhyá burnt with grief,Steed, elephant, and man, and chief?Does her loved Ráma's exile so

Afflict her with the fires of woe?'
Thus as he mused, his steeds flew fast,And swiftly through the gate he passed.On drove the charioteer, and thenIn hundreds, yea in thousands, menRan to the car from every side,And, 'Ráma, where is Ráma?' cried.Sumantra said: 'My chariot boreThe duteous prince to Gangá's shore;I left him there at his behest,And homeward to Ayodhyá pressed.'Soon as the anxious people knewThat he was o'er the flood they drewDeep sighs, and crying, Ráma! allWailed, and big tears began to fall.He heard the mournful words prolonged,As here and there the people thronged:'Woe, woe for us, forlorn, undone,No more to look on Raghu's son!His like again we ne'er shall see,Of heart so true, of hand so free,In gifts, in gatherings for debate,When marriage pomps we celebrate,What should we do? What earthly thingCan rest, or hope, or pleasure bring?'
Thus the sad town, which Ráma kept
As a kind father, wailed and wept.Each mansion, as the car went by,

Sent forth a loud and bitter cry,
As to the window every dame,Mourning for banished Ráma, came.As his sad eyes with tears o'erflowed,He sped along the royal roadTo Das'aratha's high abode.There leaping down his car he stayed;Within the gates his way he made;Through seven broad courts he onward hiedWhere people thronged on every side.From each high terrace, wild with woeThe royal Indies flocked below:
p. 163
He heard them talk in gentle tone,As each for Ráma made her moan:'What will the charioteer replyTo Queen Kaus'alyá's eager cry?With Ráma from the gates he went;Homeward alone, his steps are bent.Hard is a life with woe distressed!But difficult to win is rest,If, when her son is banished, stillShe lives beneath her load of ill.'
Such was the speech Sumantra heard
From them whom grief unfeigned had stirred.As fires of anguish burnt him through,

Swift to the monarch's hall he drew,
Past the eighth court; there met his sight,The sovereign in his palace bright,Still weeping for his son, forlorn,Pale, faint, and all with sorrow worn.As there he sat, Sumantra bentAnd did obeisance reverent,And to the king repeated o'erThe message he from Ráma bore.The monarch heard, and well-nigh brakeHis heart, but yet no word he spake:Fainting to earth he fell, and dumb,By grief for Ráma overcome,Rang through the hall a startling cry,And women's arms were tossed on high,When, with his senses all astray,Upon the ground the monarch lay.Kaus'alyá with Sumitrás aid,Raised from the ground her lord dismayed:'Sire, of high fate, she cried, O, whyDost thou no single word replyTo Ráma's messenger who bringsNews of his painful wanderings?The great injustice done, art thouShame-stricken for thy conduct now?Rise up, and do thy part: bestowComfort and help in this our woe.Speak freely, King; dismiss thy fear,For Queen Kaikeyí stands not near,

Afraid of whom thou wouldst not seek
Tidings of Ráma: freely speak.'
When the sad queen had ended so,
She sank, insatiate in her woe,And prostrate lay upon the ground,While her faint voice by sobs was drowned.When all the ladies in despairSaw Queen Kaus'alyá wailing there,And the poor king oppressed with pain,They flocked around and wept again.
Footnotes
162:1 Deities of a particular class in which five or ten 
are enumerated. They are worshipped particularly at the 
funeral obsequies in honour of deceased progenitors.
Next: Canto LVIII.: Ráma's Message.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVIII.: RÁMA'S MESSAGE.
The king a while had senseless lain,
When care brought memory back again.Then straight he called, the news to hearOf Ráma, for the charioteer,With reverent hand to hand appliedHe waited by the old man's side,Whose mind with anguish was distraughtLike a great elephant newly caught.The king with bitter pain distressedThe faithful charioteer addressed,Who, sad of mien, with flooded eye,And dust upon his limbs, stood by:'Where will be Ráma's dwelling now,At some tree's foot, beneath the bough;Ah, what will be the exile's food.Bred up with kind solicitude?Can he, long lapped in pleasant rest,Unmeet for pain, by pain oppressed,Son of earth's king, his sad night spendEarth-couched, as one that has no friend?Behind him, when abroad he sped,Cars, elephant, and foot were led:Then how shall Ráma dwell afarIn the wild woods where no men are?

How, tell me, did the princes there,
With Sítá good and soft and fair,Alighting from the chariot, treadThe forest wilds around them spread?A happy lot is thine, I ween,Whose eyes my two dear sons have seenSeeking on foot the forest shade,Like the bright Twins to view displayed,The heavenly As'vins, when they seekThe woods that hang 'neath Mandar's peak,What words, Sumantra, quickly tell,From Ráma, Lakshman. Sítá fell?How in the wood did Ráma eat?What was his bed, and what his seat?Full answer to my questions give,For I on thy replies shall live,As with the saints Yayáti heldSweet converse, from the skies expelled.'
Urged by the lord of men to speak,
Whose sobbing voice came faint and weak,Thus he, while tears his utterance broke,In answer to the monarch spoke;'Hear then the words that Ráma said,Resolved in duty's path to tread.Joining his hands, his head he bent,And gave this message, reverent:'Sumantra, to my father go,Whose lofty mind all people know:

Bow down before him, as is meet,
And in my stead salute his feet.Then to the queen my mother bend,And give the greeting that I send:Ne'er may her steps from duty err,And may it still be well with her.And add this word: 'O Queen, pursueThy vows with faithful heart and true;And ever at due season turnWhere holy fires of worship burn.And, lady, on our lord bestow
p. 164
Such honour as to Gods we owe.Be kind to every queen: let prideAnd thought of self be cast aside.In the king's fond opinion raiseKaikeyí, by respect and praise.Let the young Bharat ever beLoved, honoured as the king by thee:Thy king-ward duty ne'er forget:High over all are monarchs set.'
And Bharat, too, for me address:
Pray that all health his life may bless.Let every royal lady share,As justice bids, his love and care.Say to the strong-armed chief who brings

Joy to Iksváku's line of kings:
'As ruling prince thy care be shownOf him, our sire, who holds the throne.Stricken in years he feels their weight;But leave him in his royal state.As regent heir content thee still,Submissive to thy father's will.'Ráma again his charge renewed,As the hot flood his cheek bedewed:'Hold as thine own my mother dearWho drops for me the longing tear.'Then Lakshman, with his soul on fire,Spake breathing fast these words of ire:'Say, for what sin, for what offenceWas royal Ráma banished thence?He is the cause, the king: poor slaveTo the light charge Kaikeyí gave.Let right or wrong the motive be,The author of our woe is he.Whether the exile were decreedThrough foolish faith or guilty greed,For promises or empire, stillThe king has wrought a grievous ill.Grant that the Lord of all saw fitTo prompt the deed and sanction it,In Ráma's life no cause I seeFor which the king should bid him flee.His blinded eye refused to scanThe guilt and folly of the plan,

And from the weakness of the king
Here and hereafter woe shall spring.No more my sire: the ties that usedTo bind me to the king are loosed.My brother Ráma, Raghu's son.To me is lord, friend, sire in one.The love of men how can he win,Deserting, by the cruel sin,Their joy, whose heart is swift to feelA pleasure in the people's weal?Shall he whose mandate could expelThe virtuous Ráma, loved so well,To whom his subjects' fond hearts cling--Shall he in spite of them be king?'
But Janak's child, my lord, stood by,
And oft the votaress heaved a sigh.She seemed with dull and wandering sense,Beneath a spirit's influence.The noble princess, pained with woeWhich till that hour she ne'er could know,Tears in her heavy trouble shed,But not a word to me she said.She raised her face which grief had driedAnd tenderly her husband eyed,Gazed on him as he turned to goWhile tear chased tear in rapid flow.'

Next: Canto LIX: Das'aratha's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIX: DAS'ARATHA'S LAMENT.
As thus Sumantra, best of peers,
Told his sad tale with many tears,The monarch cried, 'I pray thee, tellAt length again what there befell.'Sumantra, at the king's behest,Striving with sobs he scarce repressed,His trembling voice at last controlled,And thus his further tidings told:'Their locks in votive coils they wound,Their coats of bark upon them bound,To Gangá's farther shore they went,Thence to Prayág their steps were bent.I saw that Lakshman walked aheadTo guard the path the two should tread.So far I saw, no more could learn,Forced by the hero to return.Retracing slow my homeward course,Scarce could I move each stubborn horse:Shedding hot tears of grief he stoodWhen Ráma turned him to the wood. 
1
As the two princes parted thenceI raised my hands in reverence,Mounted my ready car, and boreThe grief that stung me to the core.

With Guha all that day I stayed,
Still by the earnest hope delayedThat Ráma, ere the time should end,Some message from the wood might send.Thy realms, great Monarch, mourn the blow,And sympathize with Ráma's woe.
p. 165
Each withering tree hangs low his head,And shoot, and bud, and flower are dead.Dried are the floods that wont to fillThe lake, the river, and the rill.Drear is each grove and garden now,Dry every blossom on the bough.Each beast is still, no serpents crawl:A lethargy of woe on all.The very wood is silent: crushedWith grief for Ráma, all is hushed.Fair blossoms from the water born,Gay garlands that the earth adorn,And every fruit that gleams like gold,Have lost the scent that charmed of old.Empty is every grove I see,Or birds sit pensive on the tree.Where'er I look, its beauty o'er,The pleasance charms not as before.I drove through fair Ayodhyá's street:None flew with joy the car to meet.

They saw that Ráma was not there,
And turned them sighing in despair.The people in the royal wayWept tears of bitter grief, when theyBeheld me coming, from afar,No Ráma with me in the car.From palace roof and turret highEach woman bent her eager eye;She looked for Ráma, but in vain;Gazed on the car and shrieked for pain.Their long clear eyes with sorrow drownedThey, when this common grief was found,Looked each on other, friend and foe,In sympathy of levelling woe:No shade of difference betweenFoe, friend, or neutral, there was seen.Without a joy, her bosom rentWith grief for Ráma's banishment,Ayodhyá like the queen appearsWho mourns her son with many tears.'   He ended: and the king, distressed.With sobbing voice that lord addressed:'Ah me, by false Kaikeyí led,Of evil race, to evil bred,I took no counsel of the sage,Nor sought advice from skill and age,I asked no lord his aid to lend,I called no citizen or friend.Rash was my deed, bereft of sense

Slave to a woman's influence.
Surely, my lord, a woe so greatPalls on us by the will of Fate;It lays the house of Raghu low,For Destiny will have it so.I pray thee, if I e'er have doneAn act to please thee, yea, but one,Fly, fly, and Ráma homeward lead:My life, departing, counsels speed.Fly, ere the power to bid I lack,Fly to the wood: bring Ráma back.I cannot live for even oneShort hour bereaved of my son.But ah, the prince, whose arms are strong,Has journeyed far: the way is long:Me, me upon the chariot place,And let me look on Ráma's face.Ah me, my son, mine eldest-born,Where roams he in the wood forlorn,The wielder of the mighty bow,Whose shoulders like the lion's show?O, ere the light of life be dim,Take me to Sítá and to him.O Ráma, Lakshman, and O thouDear Sítá, constant to thy vow,Beloved ones, you cannot knowThat I am dying of my woe.'  The king to bitter grief a prey,That drove each wandering sense away,

Sunk in affliction's sea. too wide
To traverse, in his anguish cried:'Hard, hard to pass, my Queen, this seaOf sorrow raging over me:No Ráma near to soothe mine eye,Plunged in its lowest deeps I lie.Sorrow for Ráma swells the tide,And Sítá's absence makes it wide:My tears its foamy flood distain,Made billowy by my sighs of pain:My cries its roar, the arms I throwAbout me are the fish below,Kaikeyí is the fire that feedsBeneath: my hair the tangled weeds:Its source the tears for Ráma shed:The hump-back's words its monsters dread:The boon I gave the wretch its shore,Till Ráma's banishment be o'er.  
1
   Ah me, that I should long to set     My eager eyes to-day   On Raghu's son, and he be yet     With Lakshman far away!'   Thus he of lofty glory wailed,     And sank upon the bed.   Beneath the woe his spirit failed,     And all his senses fled.

Footnotes
164:1 'So in Homer the horses of Achilles lamented 
with many bitter tears the death of Patroclus slain by 
Hector: 
"•πποι δ• Α•ακ•δαο, ¼•χης •π•νευθεν ••ντες,
Κλ•ιον, •πειδ• πρ•τα πυθ•σθην •νι•χοιο•ν κον••σι πεσ•ντος •φ• •κτορος •νδροφ•νοιο."
                                            ILIAD. XVII. 426. 
Ancient poesy frequently associated nature with the 
joys and sorrows of man.' GORRESIO.
Next: Canto LX.: Kaus'alyá Consoled.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LX.: KAUS'ALYÁ CONSOLED.
As Queen Kaus'alyá, trembling much,
As blighted by a goblin's touch,Still lying prostrate, half awokeTo consciousness,'twas thus she spoke:'Bear me away, Sumantra, far,Where Ráma, Sítá, Lakshman are.Bereft of them I have no powerTo linger on a single hour.
p. 166
Again, I pray, thy steps retrace,And me in Dandak forest place,For after them I needs must go,Or sink to Yama's realms below   His utterance choked by tears that rolledDown from their fountains uncontrolled,With suppliant hands the charioteerThus spake, the lady's heart to cheer:'Dismiss thy grief, despair, and dreadThat fills thy soul, of sorrow bred,For pain and anguish thrown aside.Will Rama in the wood abide.And Lakshman, with unfailing care

Will guard the feet of Rama there,
Earning, with governed sense, the prizeThat waits on duty in the skies.And Sita in the wild as wellAs in her own dear home will dwell;To Rama all her heart she gives,And free from doubt and terror lives.No faintest sign of care or woeThe features of the lady show:Rethinks Videha's pride was madeFor exile in the forest shade.E'en as of old she used to roveDelighted in the city's grove,Thus, even thus she joys to treadThe woodlands uninhabited.Like a young child, her face as fairAs the young moon, she wanders there.What though in lonely woods she strayStill Rama is her joy and stay:All his the heart no sorrow bends,Her very life on him depends.For, if her lord she might not see,Ayodhy'a like the wood would be.She bids him, as she roams, declareThe names of towns and hamlets there,Marks various trees that meet her eye,And many a brook that hurries by,And Janak's daughter seems homeWhen Rama or his brother spanks

And gives the answer that she seeks.
This, Lady, I remember well,Nor angry words have to tell:Reproaches at Kaikey'i shot,Such, queen, my mind remembers not.'The speech when Sita's wrath was high,Sumantra passed in silence by,That so his pleasant words mightWith sweet report Kaulay'a's ear.Her moonlike beauty suffers notThough winds be rude and suns be hot:The way, the danger, and the toilHer gentle lustre may not soil.Like the red liiy's leafy crownOr as the fair full moon looks down,So the Videhan lady's faceStill shines with undimmished grace.What if the borrowed colours throw
O'er her fine feet no row glow,
Still with their natural tints they spreadA lotus glory where they tread.In sportive grace she walks the groundAnd sweet her chiming anklets sound.No jewels clasp the faultless limb:She leaves them all for love of him.If in the woods her gentle eyeA lion sees, or tiger nigh,Or elephant, she fears no ill

For Rama's arm supports her still,
No longer be their fate deplored,Nor thine, nor that of Kosal's lord,For conduct such as theirs shall buyWide glory that can never die.For casting grief and care away,Delighting in the forest, theyWith joyful spirits, blithe and gay,Set forward on the ancient way   Where mighty saints have led:Their highest aim, their dearest careTo keep their father's honour fair,Observing still the oath he sware,   They roam, on wild fruit fed.'Thus with persuasive art he triedTo turn her from her grief aside,   By soothing fancies won.But still she gave her sorrow vent:'Ah Rama,' was her shrill lament,'My love, my son, my son!'
Footnotes
165:1 The lines containing this heap of forced 
metaphors are marked as spurious by Schlegel.

Next: Canto LXI.: Kauslaya's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXI.: KAUSLAYA'S LAMENT.
When, best of all who give delight,
her rama wandered for from sight,Kausaaly'a weeping, sore distressed,The king her husband thus addressed;'Thy name, O Monarch, far and wid?Through the three worlds is glorified:Yet Rama has the praying mind. *His speed is true, his heart is kind.How will thy sons, good lord, sustainWith Sita, all their care and pain?How in the wild endure distress,Nursed in the lap of tenderness?How will the dear Videhan bearThe heat and cold when wandering thereBred in the bliss of princely state,So young and fair find delicate?The large-eyed lady, wont to eatThe best of finely seasoned meat--How will she now her life sustainWith woodland fare of self-sown grain?Will she, with joys encompassed long,Who loved the music and the song,In the wild wood endure to hearThe ravening lion's voice of fear?

Where sleeps my strong-armed hero, where
p. 167
Like Lord Mahendra's standard, fair?
Where is, by Lakshman's side, his bed,His club-like arm beneath his head?When shall I see his flower-like eyes,And face that with the lotus vies,Feel his sweet lily breath, and viewHis glorious hair and lotus hue?The heart within my breast, I feel,Is adamant or hardest steel,Or, in a thousand fragments split,The loss of him had shattered it,When those I love, who should be blest,Are wandering in the wood distressed,Condemned their wretched lives to leadIn exile, by thy ruthless deed.If, when the fourteen years are past,Ráma reseeks his home at last,I think not Bharat will consentTo yield the wealth and government.At funeral feasts some mourners dealTo kith and kin the solemn meal,And having duly fed them allSome Bráhmans to the banquet call.The best of Bráhmans, good and wise,The tardy summoning despise,

And, equal to the Gods, disdain
Cups, e'en of Amrit, thus to drain,Nay e'en when Brámans first have fed,They loathe the meal for others spread,And from the leavings turn with scorn,As bulls avoid a fractured horn.So Ráma, sovereign lord of men,Will spurn the sullied kingship then:He born the eldest and the best,His younger's leavings will detest,Turning from tasted food away,As tigers scorn another's prey.The sacred post is used not twice,Nor elements, in sacrifice.But once the sacred grass is spread,But once with oil the flame is fed:So Ráma's pride will ne'er receiveThe royal power which others leave,Like wine when tasteless dregs are leftOr rites of Soma juice bereft,Be sure the pride of Raghu's raceWill never stoop to such disgrace:Ths lordly lion will not bearThat man should beard him in his lair.Were all the worlds against him rangedHis dauntless soul were still unchanged:He, dutiful, in duty strong,Would purge the impious world from wrong.Could not the hero, brave and bold,

The archer, with his shafts of gold,
Burn up the very seas, as doomWill in the end all life consume!Of lion's might, eyed like a bull,A prince so brave and beautiful,Thou hast with wicked hate pursued,Like sea-born tribes who eat their brood.If thou, O Monarch, hadst but knownThe duty all the Twice-born own,If the good laws had touched thy mind,Which sages in the Scriptures find,Thou ne'er hadst driven forth to pineThis brave, this duteous son of thine.First on her lord the wife depends,Next on her son and last on friends:These three supports in life has she,And not a fourth for her may be.Thy heart, O King, I have not won;In wild woods roams my banished son;Far are my friends: ah, hapless me,Quite ruined and destroyed by thee.'
Next: Canto LXII.: Das'aratha Consoled.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXII.: DAS'ARATHA CONSOLED.
The queen's stern speech the monarch heard,
As rage and grief her bosom stirred,And by his anguish sore oppressedReflected in his secret breast.Fainting and sad, with woe distraught.He wandered in a maze of thought;At length the queller of the foeGrew conscious, rallying from his woe.When consciousness returned anewLong burning sighs the monarch drew.Again immersed in thought he eyedKaus'alyá standing by his side.Back to his pondering soul was broughtThe direful deed his hand had wrought,When, guiltless of the wrong intent,His arrow at a sound was sent.Distracted by his memory's sting,And mourning for his son, the kingTo two consuming griefs a prey,A miserable victim lay.The double woe devoured him fast,As on the ground his eyes he cast,Joined suppliant hands, her heart to touch.And spake in the answer, trembling much:

'Kaus'alyá, for thy grace I sue,
Joining these hands as suppliants do.Thou e'en to foes hast ever beenA gentle, good, and loving queen.Her lord, with noble virtues graced,Her lord, by lack of all debased,Is still a God in woman's eyes,If duty's law she hold and prize.Thou, who the right hast aye pursued,Life's changes and its chances viewed,Shouldst never launch, though sorrow-stirred,At me distressed, one bitter word.'   She listened, as with sorrow faintHe murmured forth his sad complaint:Her brimming eyes with tears ran o'er,As spouts the new fallen water pour;
p. 168
His suppliant hands, with fear dismayedShe gently clasped in hers, and laid,Like a fair lotus, on her head,And faltering in her trouble said:'Forgive me; at thy feet I lie,With low bent head to thee I cry.By thee besought, thy guilty damePardon from thee can scarcely claim.She merits not the name of wifeWho cherishes perpetual strife

With her own husband good and wise,
Her lord both here and in the skies.I know the claims of duty well,I know thy lips the truth must tell.All the wild words I rashly spoke,Forth from my heart, through anguish, broke;For sorrow bends the stoutest soul,And cancels Scripture's high control.Yea, sorrow's might all else o'erthrowsThe strongest and the worst of foes.'Tis thus with all: we keenly feel,Yet bear the blows our foemen deal,But when a slender woe assailsThe manifest spirit bends and quails.The fifth long night has now begunSince the wild woods have lodged my son:To me whose joy is drowned in tears,Each day a dreary year appears.While all my thoughts on him are setGrief at my heart swells wilder yet:With doubled might thus Ocean ravesWhen rushing floods increase his waves.'   As from Kaus'alyá reasoning wellThe gentle words of wisdom fell,The sun went down with dying flame,And darkness o'er the landscape came.His lady's soothing words in partRelieved the monarch's aching heart,Who, wearied out by all his woes,

Yielded to sleep and took repose.
Next: Canto LXIII.: The Hermit's Son.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIII.: THE HERMIT'S SON.
But soon by rankling grief oppressed
The king awoke from troubled rest,And his sad heart was tried againWith anxious thought where all was pain.Ráma and Lakshman's mournful fateOn Das'aratha, good and greatAs Indra, pressed with crushing weight,As when the demon's might assailsThe Sun-God, and his glory pales.Ere yet the sixth long night was spent.Since Rama to the woods was sent,The king at midnight sadly thoughtOf the old crime his hand had wrought,And thus to Queen Kausalyá criedWho still for Ráma moaned and sighed:'If thou art waking, give, I pray,Attention to the words I say.Whate'er the conduct men pursue,Be good or ill the acts they do,Be sure, dear Queen, they find the meedOf wicked or of virtuous deed.A heedless child we call the manWhose feeble judgment fails to scanThe weight of what his hands may do,

Its lightness, fault, and merit too.
One lays the Mango garden low,And bids the gay Palás'as grow:Longing for fruit their bloom he sees,But grieves when fruit should bend the trees.Cut by my hand, my fruit-trees fell,Palás'a trees I watered well.My hopes this foolish heart deceive,And for my banished son I grieve.Kaus'alyá, in my youthful primeArmed with my bow I wrought the crime,Proud of my skill, my name renowned,An archer prince who shoots by sound.The deed this hand unwitting wroughtThis misery on my soul has brought,As children seize the deadly cupAnd blindly drink the poison up.As the unreasoning man may beCharmed with the gay Palás'a tree,I unaware have reaped the fruitOf joying at a sound to shoot.As regent prince I shared the throne.Thou wast a maid to me unknown.The early Rain-time duly came,And strengthened love's delicious flame.The sun had drained the earth that layAll glowing 'neath the summer day,And to the gloomy clime had fledWhere dwell the spirits of the dead.  
1

The fervent heat that moment ceased.
The darkening clouds each hour increasedAnd frogs and deer and peacocks allRejoiced to see the torrents fall.Their bright wings heavy from the shower,The birds, new-bathed, had scarce the powerTo reach the branches of the treesWhose high tops swayed beneath the breeze.The fallen rain, and falling still,Hung like a sheet on every hill,Till, with glad deer, each flooded steepShowed glorious as the mighty deep.The torrents down its wooded sidePoured, some unstained, while others dyed
p. 169
Gold, ashy, silver, ochre, boreThe tints of every mountain ore.In that sweet time, when all are pleased,My arrows and my bow I seized;Keen for the chase, in field or grove,Down Sarjú's bank my car I drove.I longed with all my lawless willSome elephant by night to kill,Some buffalo that came to drink,Or tiger, at the river's brink.When all around was dark and still,I heard a pitcher slowly fill,

And thought, obscured in deepest shade,
An elephant the sound had made.I drew a shaft that glittered bright,Fell as a serpent's venomed bite;I longed to lay the monster dead,And to the mark my arrow sped.Then in the calm of morning, clearA hermit's wailing smote my ear:'Ah me, ah me,' he cried, and sank,Pierced by my arrow, on the bank.E'en as the weapon smote his side,I heard a human voice that cried:'Why lights this shaft on one like me,A poor and harmless devotee?I came by night to fill my jarFrom this lone stream where no men are.Ah, who this deadly shaft has shotWhom have I wronged, and knew it not?Why should a boy so harmless feelThe vengeance of the winged steel?Or who should slay the guiltless sonOf hermit sire who injures none,Who dwells retired in woods, and thereSupports his life on woodland fare?Ah me, ah me, why am I slain,What booty will the murderer gain?In hermit coils I bind my hair,Coats made of skin and bark I wear.Ah, who the cruel deed can praise

Whose idle toil no fruit repays,
As impious as the wretch's crimeWho dares his master's bed to climb?Nor does my parting spirit grieveBut for the life which thus I leave:Alas, my mother and my sire,--I mourn for them when I expire.Ah me, that aged, helpless pair,Long cherished by my watchful care,How will it be with them this dayWhen to the Five 
1 I pass away?
Pierced by the self-same dust we die,Mine aged mother, sire, and I.Whose mighty hand, whose lawless mindHas all the three to death consigned!'
When I, by love of duty stirred,
That touching lamentation heard,
Pierced to the heart by sudden woe,
I threw to earth my shafts and bow.My heart was full of grief and dreadAs swiftly to the place I sped,Where, by my arrow wounded sore,A hermit lay on Sarjú's shore.His matted hair was all unbound.His pitcher empty on the ground,And by the fatal arrow pained,He lay with dust and gore distained.

I stood confounded and amazed:
His dying eyes to mine he raised,And spoke this speech in accents stern,As though his light my soul would burn:'How have I wronged thee, King, that IStruck by thy mortal arrow die?The wood my home, this jar I brought,And water for my parents sought.This one keen shaft that strikes me throughSlays sire and aged mother too.Feeble and blind, in helpless pain,They wait for me and thirst in vain.They with parched lips their pangs must bear,And hope will end in blank despair.Ah me, there seems no fruit in storeFor holy zeal or Scripture lore,Or else ere now my sire would knowThat his dear son is lying low.Yet, if my mournful fate he knew,What could his arm so feeble do?The tree, firm-rooted, ne'er may beThe guardian of a stricken tree.Haste to my father, and relateWhile time allows, my sudden fate,Lest he consume thee as the fireBurns up the forest, in his ire.This little path, O King, pursue:My father's cot thou soon wilt view.There sue for pardon to the sage.

Lest he should curse thee in his rage.
First from the wound extract the dartThat kills me with its deadly smart,E'en as the flushed impetuous tideEats through the river's yielding side.'
I feared to draw the arrow out,
And pondered thus in painful doubt:'Now tortured by the shaft he lies,But if I draw it forth he dies.'Helpless I stood, faint, sorely grieved:The hermit's son my thought perceived;As one o'ercome by direst painHe scarce had strength to speak again.With writhing limb and struggling breath,Nearer and ever nearer deathMy senses undisturbed remain,And fortitude has conquered pain:Now from one tear thy soul be freed.Thy hand has made a Bráhman bleed.Let not this pang thy bosom wring:No twice-born youth am I, O King,
p. 170
For of a Vais'ya sire I came,Who wedded with a S'udrá dame.
These words the boy could scarcely say,

As tortured by the shaft he lay.
Twisting his helpless body round,Then trembling senseless on the ground.Then from his bleeding side I drewThe rankling shaft that pierced him through.With death's last fear my face he eyed,And, rich in store of penance, died.'
Footnotes
168:1 The southern region is the abode of Yama the 
Indian Pluto, and of departed spirits.
169:1 The five elements of which the body consists, and to which it returns.
Next: Canto LXIV.: Das'aratha's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIV.: DAS'ARATHA'S DEATH.
The son of Raghu to his queen
Thus far described the unequalled scene,And, as the hermit's death he rued,The mournful story thus renewed:'The deed my heedless hand had wroughtPerplexed me with remorseful thought,And all alone I pondered stillHow kindly deed might salve the ill.The pitcher from the ground I took,And filled it from that fairest brook,Then, by the path the hermit showed,I reached his sainted sire's abode.I came, I saw: the aged pair,Feeble and blind, were sitting there,Like birds with clipped wings, side by side,With none their helpless steps to guide.Their idle hours the twain beguiledWith talk of their returning child,And still the cheering hope enjoyed,The hope, alas, by me destroyed.Then spoke the sage, as drawing nearThe sound of footsteps reached his ear:'Dear son, the water quickly bring;Why hast thou made this tarrying?

Thy mother thirsts, and thou hast played,
And bathing in the brook delayed.She weeps because thou camest not;Haste, O my son, within the cot.If she or I have ever doneA thing to pain thee, dearest son,Dismiss the memory from thy mind:A hermit thou, be good and kind.On thee our lives, our all, depend:Thou art thy friendless parents' friend.The eyeless couple's eye art thou:Then why so cold and silent now?'
With sobbing voice and bosom wrung
I scarce could move my faltering tongue,And with my spirit filled with dreadI looked upon the sage, and said,While mind, and sense, and nerve I strungTo fortify my trembling tongue,And let the aged hermit knowHis son's sad fate, my fear and woe:'High-minded Saint, not I thy child,A warrior, Das'aratha styled.I bear a grievous sorrow's weightBorn of a deed which good men hate.My lord, I came to Sarj?s shore,And in my hand my bow I boreFor elephant or beast of chaseThat seeks by night his drinking place,

There from the stream a sound I heard,
As if a jar the water stirred,An elephant, I thought, was nigh:I aimed, and let an arrow fly.Swift to the place I made my way,And there a wounded hermit layGasping for breath: the deadly dartStood quivering in his youthful heart.I hastened near with pain oppressed;He faltered out his last behest.And quickly, as he bade me do,From his pierced side the shaft I drew.I drew the arrow from the rent,And up to heaven the hermit went,Lamenting, as from earth he passed,His aged parents to the last.Thus, unaware, the deed was done:My hand, unwitting killed thy son.For what remains, O, let me winThy pardon for my heedless sin.'
As the sad tale of sin I told
The hermit's grief was uncontrolled.With flooded eyes, and sorrow-faint,Thus spake the venerable saint:I stood with hand to hand applied,And listened as he spoke and sighed:'If thou, O King, hadst left unsaidBy thine own tongue this tale of dread,

Thy head for hideous guilt accursed
Had in a thousand pieces burst.A hermits blood by warrior spilt,In such a case, with purposed guilt,Down from his high estate would bringEven the thunder's mighty KingAnd he a dart who (illegible) sendsAgainst the devotee who spendsHis pure life by the law of heaven--That sinner's head will split in seven.Thou livest, for thy heedless handHas wrought a deed thou hast not planned,Else thou and all of Raghu's lineHad perished by this act of thine.Now guide us,' thus the hermit said,'Forth to the spot where he lies dead.Guide us, this day, O Monarch, weFor the last time our son would see:The hermit dress of skin he woreRent from his limbs distained with gore;His senseless body lying slain,His soul in Yama's dark domain.'
Alone the mourning pair I led,
Their souls with woe disquieted,And let the dame and hermit lay
p. 171

Their hands upon the breathless clay.
The father touched his son, and pressedThe body to his aged breast;Then falling by the dead boy's side,He lifted up his voice, and cried:
'Hast thou no word, my child, to say?
No greeting for thy sire to-day?Why art thou angry, darling? whyWilt thou upon the cold earth lie?If thou, my son, art wroth with me,Here, duteous child, thy mother see.What! no embrace for me, my son?No word of tender love--not one?Whose gentle voice, so soft and clear,Soothing my spirit, shall I hearWhen evening comes, with accents sweetScripture or ancient lore repeat?Who, having fed the sacred fire,And duly bathed, as texts require.Will cheer, when evening rites are done,The father mourning for his son?Who will the daily meal provideFor the poor wretch who lacks a guide,Feeding the helpless with the bestBerries and roots, like some dear guest?How can these hands subsistence findFor thy poor mother, old and blind?The wretched votaress how sustain,

Who mourns her child in ceaseless pain?
Stay yet a while, my darling, stay,Nor fly to Yama's realm to-day.To-morrow I thy sire and sheWho bare thee, child, will go with, thee. 
1
Then when I look on Yama, ITo great Vivasvat's son will cry:'Hear, King of justice, and restoreOur child to feed us, I implore.Lord of the world, of mighty fame,Faithful and just, admit my claim,And grant this single boon to freeMy soul from fear, to one like me.'Because, my son, untouched by stain,By sinful hands thou fallest slainWin, through thy truth, the sphere where thoseWho die by hostile darts repose.Seek the blest home prepared for allThe valiant who in battle fall,Who face the foe and scorn to yield,In glory dying on the field.Rise to the heaven where DhundhumarAnd Nahush, mighty heroes, are,Where Janamejay and the blestDilípa, Sagar, S'alvya, rest:
Home of all virtuous spirits, earned
By fervent rites and Scripture learned:By those whose sacred fires have glowed.

Whose liberal hands have fields bestowed:
By givers of a thousand cows,By lovers of one faithful spouse:By those who serve their masters well.And cast away this earthly shell.None of my race can ever knowThe bitter pain of lasting woe.But doomed to that dire fate is heWhose guilty hand has slaughtered thee.
Thus with wild tears the aged saint
Made many a time his piteous plaint,Then with his wife began to shedThe funeral water for the dead.But in a shape celestial clad,Won by the merits of the lad.The spirit from the body brakeAnd to the mourning parents spake:'A glorious home in realms aboveRewards my care and filial love.You, honoured parents, soon shall bePartakers of that home with me.'
He spake, and swiftly mounting high,
With Indra near him, to the skyOn a bright car, with flame that glowed,Sublime the duteous hermit rode.
The father, with his consort's aid.

The funeral rites with water paid,
And thus his speech to me renewedWho stood in suppliant attitude:'Slay me this day, O, slay me, King,For death no longer has a sting.Childless am I: thy dart has doneTo death my dear, my only son.Because the boy I loved so wellSlain by thy heedless arrow fell,My curse upon thy soul shall pressWith bitter woe and heaviness.I mourn a slaughtered child, and thouShalt feel the pangs that kill me now.Bereft and suffering e'en as I,So shalt thou mourn thy son, and die.Thy hand unwitting dealt the blowThat laid a holy hermit low,And distant, therefore, is the timeWhen thou shalt suffer for the crime.The hour shall come when, crushed by woesLike these I feel, thy life shall close:A debt to pay in after daysLike his the priestly fee who pays."
This curse on me the hermit laid,
Nor yet his tears and groans were stayed.Then on the pire their bodies castThe pair; and straight to heaven they passed.As in sad thought I pondered long

Back to my memory came the wrong
Done in wild youth, O lady dear.When 'twas my boast to shoot by ear.
p. 172
The deed has borne the fruit, which nowHangs ripe upon the bending bough:Thus dainty meats the palate please,And lure the weak to swift disease.Now on my soul return with dreadThe words that noble hermit said,That I for a dear son should grieve,And of the woe my life should leave.'
Thus spake the king with many a tear;
Then to his wife he cried in fear:'I cannot see thee, love; but layThy gentle hand in mine, I pray.Ah me, if Ráma touched me thus,If once, returning home to us,He bade me wealth and lordship give,Then, so I think, my soul would live.Unlike myself, unjust and meanHave been my ways with him, my Queen,But like himself is all that he,My noble son, has done to me.His son, though far from right he stray,What prudent sire would cast away?

What banished son would check his ire,
Nor speak reproaches of his sire?I see thee not: these eyes grow blind,And memory quits my troubled mind.Angels of Death are round me: theySummon my soul with speed away.What woe more grievous can there be,That, when from light and life I flee,I may not, ere I part, beholdMy virtuous Ráma, true and bold?Grief for my son, the brave and true,Whose joy it was my will to do,Dries up my breath, as summer driesThe last drop in the pool that lies.Not men, but blessed Gods, are theyWhose eyes shall see his face that day;See him, when fourteen years are past,With earrings decked return at last.My fainting mind forgets to think:Low and more low my spirits sink.Each from its seat, my senses steal:I cannot hear, or taste, or feel.This lethargy of soul o'ercomesEach organ, and its function numbs:So when the oil begins to fail,The torch's rays grow faint and pale.This flood of woe caused by this handDestroys me helpless and unmanned,Resistless as the floods that bore

A passage through the river shore.
Ah Raghu's son, ah mighty-armed,By whom my cares were soothed and charmed,My son in whom I took delight,Now vanished from thy father's sight!Kaus'alyá, ah, I cannot see;Sumitrá, gentle devotee!Alas, Kaikeyí, cruel dame,My bitter foe, thy father's shame!'
Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá kept
Their watch beside him as he wept.And Das'aratha moaned and sighed,And grieving for his darling died.
Footnotes
171:1 So dying York cries over the body of Suffolk: 
          'Tarry, dear cousin Suffolk!   My soul shall thine keep company to heaven.   Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast.'                          King Henry V, Act IV, 6

Next: Canto LXV.: The Women's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXV.: THE WOMEN'S LAMENT.
And now the night had past away,
And brightly dawned another day;The minstrels, trained to play and sing,Flocked to the chamber of the king:Bards, who their gayest raiment wore,And heralds famed for ancient lore:And singers, with their songs of praise,Made music in their several ways.There as they poured their blessings choice.And hailed their king with hand and voice,Their praises with a swelling roarEchoed through court and corridor.Then as the bards his glory sang,From beaten palms loud answer rang,As glad applauders clapped their hands,And told his deeds in distant lands.The swelling concert woke a throngOf sleeping birds to life and song:Some in the branches of the trees,Some caged in halls and galleries.Nor was the soft string music mute;The gentle whisper of the lute,And blessings sung by singers skilledThe palace of the monarch filled.

Eunuchs and dames of life unstained,
Each in the arts of waiting trained,Drew near attentive as before,And crowded to the chamber door:These skilful when and how to shedThe lustral stream o'er limb and head,Others with golden ewers stoodOf water stained with sandal wood.And many a maid, pure, young, and fair,Her load of early offerings bare,Cups of the flood which all revere,And sacred things, and toilet gear.Each several thing was duly broughtAs rule of old observance taught,And lucky signs on each impressedStamped it the fairest and the best.There anxious, in their long array,All waited till the shine of day:But when the king nor rose nor spoke,Doubt and alarm within them woke.Forthwith the dames, by duty led,Attendants on the monarch's bed,Within the royal chamber pressedTo wake their master from his rest.Skilled in the lore of dreaming, theyFirst touched the bed on which he lay.But none replied; no sound was heard.
p. 173

Nor hand, nor head, nor body stirred.
They trembled, and their dread increased,Fearing his breath of life had ceased,And bending low their heads, they shookLike the tall reeds that fringe the brook,In doubt and terror down they knelt,Looked on his face, his cold hand felt,And then the gloomy truth appearedOf all their hearts had darkly feared.Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá, wornWith weeping for their sons, forlorn,Woke not, but lay in slumber deepAnd still as death's unending sleep.Bowed down by grief, her colour fled,Her wonted lustre dull and dead,Kaus'alyá shone not, like a starObscured behind a cloudy bar.Beside the king's her couch was spread,And next was Queen Sumitrá's bed,Who shone no more with beauty's glow,Her face bedewed with tears of woe.There lapped in sleep each wearied queen,There as in sleep, the king was seen;And swift the troubling thought came o'erTheir spirits that he breathed no more.At once with wailing loud and highThe matrons shrieked a bitter cry,As widowed elephants bewailTheir dead lord in the woody vale.

At the loud shriek that round them rang,
Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá sprangAwakened from their beds, with eyesWide open in their first surprise.Quick to the monarch's side they came,And saw and touched his lifeless frame;One cry, O husband! forth they sent,And prostrate to the ground they went.The king of Kosal's daughter  
1 there
Writhed, with the dust on limb and hairLustreless, as a star might lieHurled downward from the glorious sky.When the king's voice in death was stilled,The women who the chamber filledSaw, like a widow elephant slain,Kaus'alyá prostrate in her pain.Then all the monarch's ladies ledBy Queen Kaikeyí at their head,Poured forth their tears, and weeping so,Sank on the ground, consumed by woe.The cry of grief so long and loudWent up from all the royal crowd,That, doubled by the matron train,It made the palace ring again.Filled with dark fear and eager eyes,Anxiety and wild surmise;Echoing with the cries of griefOf sorrowing friends who mourned their chief,Dejected, pale with deep distress,

Hurled from their height of happiness:
Such was the look the palace woreWhere lay the king who breathed no more.
Footnotes
173:1 Kausalya, daughter of the king of another Kos'al.
Next: Canto LXVI.: The Embalming.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVI.: THE EMBALMING.
Kaus'alyá's eyes with tears o'erflowed.
Weighed down by varied sorrows's load;On her dead lord her gaze she bent,Who lay like fire whose might is spent,Like the great deep with waters dry,Or like the clouded sun on high.Then on her lap she laid his head.And on Kaikeyí looked and said:'Triumphant now enjoy thy reignWithout a thorn thy side to pain.Thou hast pursued thy single aim,And lulled the king, O wicked dame.Far from my sight my Ráma flies,My perished lord has sought the skies.No friend, no hope my life to cheer,I cannot tread the dark path here.Who would forsake her husband, whoThat God to whom her love is due,And wish to live one hour, but sheWhose heart no duty owns, like thee?The ravenous sees no fault: his greedWill e'en on poison blindly feed.Kaikeyí, through a hump-back maid,This royal house in death has laid.

King Janak, with his queen, will hear
Heart rent like me the tidings drearOf Ráma banished by the king,Urged by her impious counselling.No son has he, his age is great,And sinking with the double weight,He for his darling child will pine,And pierced with woe his life resign.Sprung from Videha's monarch, sheA sad and lovely devotee,Roaming the wood, unmeet for woe,Will toil and trouble undergo.She in the gloomy night with fearThe cries of beast and bird will hear,And trembling in her wild alarmWill cling to Ráma's sheltering arm.Ah, little knows my duteous sonThat I am widowed and undone--My Ráma of the lotus eye,Gone hence, gone hence, alas, to die.Now, as a living wife and true,I, e'en this day, will perish too:Around his form these arms will throw.And to the fire with him will go.'
Clasping her husband's lifeless clay
A while the weeping votaress lay,Till chamberlains removed her thence

p. 174
O'ercome by sorrow's violence.
Then in a cask of oil they laidHim who in life the world had swayed,And finished, as the lords desired,All rites for parted souls required.The lords, all-wise, refused to burnThe monarch ere his son's return;So for a while the corpse they setEmbalmed in oil, and waited yet.The women heard: no doubt remained,And wildly for the king they plained.With gushing tears that drowned each eyeWildly they waved their arms on high,And each her mangling nails impressedDeep in her head and knee and breast:'Of Ráma reft,--who ever spakeThe sweetest words the heart to take,Who firmly to the truth would cling,--Why dost thou leave us, mighty King?How can the consorts thou hast leftWidowed, of Raghu's son bereft,Live with our foe Kaikeyí near,The wicked queen we hate and fear?She threw away the king, her spiteDrove Ráma forth and Lakshman's might,And gentle Sítá: how will sheSpare any, whosoe'er it be?'

Oppressed with sorrow, tear-distained,
The royal women thus complained.Like night when not a star appears,Like a sad widow drowned in tears,Ayodhyá's city, dark and dim,Reft of her lord was sad for him.When thus for woe the king to heaven had fled,   And still on earth his lovely wives remained.With dying light the sun to rest had sped,   And night triumphant o'er the landscape reigned.
Next: Canto LXVII.: The Praise of Kings.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVII.: THE PRAISE OF KINGS.
That night of sorrow passed away,
And rose again the God of Day.Then all the twice-born peers of stateTogether met for high debate.Jáválí, lord of mighty fame.And Gautam, and Kátyáyan came,And Márkandeya's reverend age,And Vámadeva, glorious sage:Sprung from Mudgalya's seed the one,The other ancient Kas'yap's son.With lesser lords these Bráhmans eachSpoke in his turn his several speech,And turning to Vas'ishtha, bestOf household priests him thus addressed:The night of bitter woe has past,Which seemed a hundred years to last,Our king, in sorrow for his son,Reunion with the Five has won.His soul is where the blessed are,While Ráma roams in woods afar,And Lakshman, bright in glorious deeds,Goes where his well-loved brother leads.And Bharat and S'atrughna, theyWho smite their foes in battle fray,

Far in the realm of Kekaya stay,
Where their maternal grandsire's careKeeps Rájagriha's city fair.Let one of old Ikshváku's raceObtain this day the sovereign's place,Or havoc and destruction straightOur kingless land will devastate.In kingless lands no thunder's voice,No lightning wreaths the heart rejoice,Nor does Parjanya's heavenly rainDescend upon the burning plain.Where none is king, the sower's handCasts not the seed upon the land;The son against the father strives.And husbands fail to rule their wives.In kingless realms no princes callTheir friends to meet in crowded hall;No joyful citizens resortTo garden trim or sacred court.In kingless realms no Twice-born careTo sacrifice with text and prayer,Nor Bráhmans, who their vows maintain,The great solemnities ordain.The joys of happier days have ceased:No gathering, festival, or feastTogether calls the merry throngDelighted with the play and song.In kingless lands it ne'er is wellWith sons of trade who buy and sell:

No men who pleasant tales repeat
Delight the crowd with stories sweet.In kingless realms we ne'er beholdYoung maidens decked with gems and gold,Flock to the gardens blithe and gayTo spend their evening hours in play.No lover in the flying carRides with his love to woods afar.In kingless lands no wealthy swainWho keeps the herd and reaps the grain,Lies sleeping, blest with ample store,Securely near his open door.Upon the royal roads we seeNo tusked elephant roaming free,Of three-score years, whose head and neckSweet tinkling bells of silver deck.We hear no more the glad applauseWhen his strong bow each rival draws,No clap of hands, no eager criesThat cheer each martial exercise.In kingless realms no merchant bandsWho travel forth to distant lands,With precious wares their wagons load.
p. 175
And fear no danger on the road,No sage secure in self-control,Brooding on God with mind and soul,

In lonely wanderings finds his home
Where'er at eve his feet may roam.In kingless realms no man is sureHe holds his life and wealth secure.In kingless lands no warriors smiteThe foeman's host in glorious fight.In kingless lands the wise no more.Well trained in Scripture's holy lore.In shady groves and gardens meetTo argue in their calm retreat.No longer, in religious fear,Do they who pious vows revere,Bring dainty cates and wreaths of flowersAs offerings to the heavenly powers.No longer, bright as trees in spring,Shine forth the children of the kingResplendent in the people's eyesWith aloe wood and sandal dyes.A brook where water once has been,A grove where grass no more is green,Kine with no herdsman's guiding hand--So wretched is a kingless land.The car its waving banner rears,Banner of fire the smoke appears:Our king, the banner of our pride,A God with Gods is glorified.In kingless lands no law is known,And none may call his wealth his own,Each preys on each from hour to hour,

As fish the weaker fish devour.
Then fearless, atheists overleapThe bounds of right the godly keep,And when no royal powers restrain,Pre?inence and lordship gain.As in the frame of man the eyeKeeps watch and ward, a careful spy,The monarch in his wide domainsProtects the truth, the right maintains.He is the right, the truth is he,Their hopes in him the well-born see.On him his people's lives depend,Mother is he, and sire, nnd friend.The world were veiled in blinding night,And none could see or know aright,Ruled there no king in any stateThe good and ill to separate.We will obey thy word and willAs if our king were living still:As keeps his bounds the faithful sea,So we observe thy high decree.O best of Brámans, first in place,   Our kingless land lies desolate:Some scion of Ikshváku's race   Do thou as monarch consecrate.'
Next: Canto LXVIII.: The Envoys.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVIII.: THE ENVOYS.
Vas'ishtha heard their speech and prayer,
And thus addressed the concourse there.Friends, Brámans, counsellors, and allAssembled in the palace hall:'Ye know that Bharat, free from care,Still lives in Rámagriha  
1 where
The father of his mother reigns:S'atrughna by his side remains.Let active envoys, good at need,Thither on fleetest horses speed,To bring the hero youths away:Why waste the time in dull delay?'   Quick came from all the glad reply:'Vas'ishtha, let the envoys fly'He heard their speech, and thus renewedHis charge before the multitude:'Nandan, As'ok, Siddhárth, attend,Your ears, Jayanta, Vijay, lend:Be yours, what need requires, to do:I speak these words to all of you.With coursers of the fleetest breedTo Rájagriha's city speed.Then rid your bosoms of distress,And Bharat thus from me address:

'The household priest and peers by us
Send health to thee and greet thee thus:Come to thy father's home with haste:Thine absent time no longer waste.'But speak no word of Ráma fled,Tell not the prince his sire is dead,Nor to the royal youth the fateThat ruins Raghu's race relate.Go quickly hence, and with you bearFine silken vestures rich and rare.And gems and many a precious thingAs gifts to Bharat and the king.'
   With ample stores of food supplied,
Bach to his home the envoys hied,Prepared, with steeds of swiftest race,lo Kekaya's land  
2 their way to trace.
They made all due provision there,And every need arranged with care,Then ordered by Vas'ishtha. theyWent forth with speed upon their way.Then northward of Pralamba, westOf Apartála, on they pressed,Crossing the M'aliní that flowedWith gentle stream athwart the road.They traversed Gangás holy waves
p. 176

Where she Hastinapura  1 lives,
Thence to Panchala  2 westward fast
Through Kurujangal's land  3 they passed.
On, on their course the envoys held
By urgency of task impelled.Quick glancing at each lucid floodAnd sweet lake gay with flower and bud.Beyond, they passed unwearied o'er,Where glad birds fill the flood and shoreOf Saradanda racing fleetWith heavenly water clear and sweet.Thereby a tree celestial growsWhich every boon on prayer bestows:To its blest shade they humbly bent,Then to Kulinga's town they went.Then, having passed the Warrior's Wood,In Abhikala next they stood,O'er sacred Ikshumati  
4 came,
Their ancient kings' ancestral claim.They saw the learned Brahmans stand,Each drinking from his hollowed hand,And through Bahika  
5 journeying still
They reached at length Sudaman's hill:There Vishnu's footstep turned to see,Vipasa  
6 viewed, and Salmali,
And many a lake and river met,Tank, pool, and pond, and rivulet.And lions saw, and tigers near,And elephants and herds of deer,

And still, by prompt obedience led,
Along the ample road they sped.Then when their course so swift and long,Had worn their steeds though fleet and strong,To Girivraja's splendid townThey came by night, and lighted down.
To please their master, and to guard
     The royal race, the lineal right,   The envoys, spent with riding hard,To that fair city came by night.  
1b
Footnotes
175:1 Rámagriha, or Girivraja was the capital of 
As'vapati, Bharat's maternal grand father.
175:2 The Kekayas or Kaikayas in the Punjab appear amongst the chief nations in the war of the 
Mahábhárata; their king being a kinsman of Krishna.
176:1 Hástinapura was the capital of the kingdom of 
Kuru, near the modern Delhi.
176:2 "The Panchálas occupied the upper part of the Doab.

176:3 'Kurujángala and its inhabitants are frequently 
mentioned in the Mahábhárata, as in the Ádi-parv. 
3789, 4337, et al.' WILSON'S Vishnu Purána. Vol. II. p. 176. DR. HALL'S Note.
176:4 'The •ξ•¼ατις of Arrian. See As. Res. Vol XV. p. 
420, 421, also Indische Alterthumskunde, Vol. I. p. 602, 
first footnote.' WILSON'S Vishnu Purána, Vol. I, p 421. DR. HALL'S Edition. The Ikshumatí was a river in Kurukshetra.
176:5 'The Bahíkas are described in the Mahábhárata, 
Kama Parvan, with some detail, and comprehend the 
different nations of the Punjab from the Sutlej to the Indus.' WILSON S Vishnu Purana. Vol.l, p. 167.
176:6 The Beas, Hyphsis, or Bibasis.
Next: Canto LXIX.: Bharat's Dream.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIX.: BHARAT'S DREAM.
The night those messengers of state
Had past within the city's gate,In dreams the slumbering Bharat sawA sight that chilled his soul with awe.The dream that dire events foretoldLeft Bharat's heart with horror cold,
p. 177
And with consuming woes distraught,Upon his aged sire he thought.His dear companions, swift to traceThe signs of anguish on his face,Drew near, his sorrow to expel,And pleasant tales began to tell.Some woke sweet music's cheering sound,And others danced in lively round.With joke and jest they strove to raiseHis spirits, quoting ancient plays;But Bharat still, the lofty-souled,Deaf to sweet tales his fellows told,Unmoved by music, dance, and jest,Sat silent, by his woe oppressed,To him, begirt by comrades near,

Thus spoke the friend he held most dear:
'Why ringed around by friends, art thouSo silent and so mournful now?''Hear thou,' thus Bharat made reply,'What chills my heart and dims mine eye,I dreamt I saw the king my sireSink headlong in a lake of mireDown from a mountain high in air,His body soiled, and loose his hair.Upon the miry lake he seemedTo lie and welter, as I dreamed;With hollowed hands full many a draughtOf oil he took, and loudly laughed.With head cast down I saw him makeA meal on sesamum and cake;The oil from every member dripped,And in its clammy flood he dipped.The ocean's bed was bare and dry,The moon had fallen from the sky,And all the world lay still and dead,With whelming darkness overspread.The earth was rent and opened wide,The leafy trees were scorched, and died;I saw the seated mountains split.And wreaths of rising smoke emit.The stately beast the monarch rodeHis long tusks rent and splintered showed;And flames that quenched and cold hadlainBlazed forth with kindled light again.

I looked, and many a handsome dame,
Arrayed in brown and sable cameAnd bore about the monarch, dressed,On iron stool, in sable vest.And then the king, of virtuous mind,A blood-red wreath around him twined,Forth on an ass-drawn chariot sped,As southward still he bent his head.Then, crimson-clad, a dame appearedWho at the monarch laughed and jeered;And a she-monster, dire to view,Her hand upon his body threw.Such is the dream I dreamt by night,Which chills me yet with wild affright:Either the king or Ráma, IOr Lakshman now must surely die.For when an ass-drawn chariot seemsTo bear away a man in dreams,Be sure above his funeral pyreThe smoke soon rears its cloudy spire.This makes my spirit low and weak.My tongue is slow and both to speak:My lips and throat are dry for dread,And all my soul disquieted.My lips, relaxed, can hardly speak,And chilling dread has changed my cheekI blame myself in aimless fears,And still no cause of blame appears,I dwell upon this dream of ill

     Whose changing scenes I viewed,
   And on the startling horror still     My troubled thoughts will brood.   Still to my soul these terrors cling,     Reluctant to depart,   And the strange vision of the king     Still weighs upon my heart.'
Footnotes
176:1b It would be lost labour to attempt to verify all 
the towns and streams mentioned in Cantos LXVIII and 
LXXII. Professor Wilson observes (Vishnu Purána, p. 139. Dr. Hall's Edition) 'States, and tribes, and cities have disappeared, even from recollection; and some of the natural features of the country, especially the rivers, have undergone a total alteration. 
Notwithstanding these impediments, however, we 
should be able to identify at least mountains and rivers, to a much greater extent than is now practicable, if our maps were not so miserably defective in their nomenclature. None of our surveyors or geographers have been oriental scholars. It may be doubted if any of them have been conversant with the spoken language of the country. They have, consequently, put down names 

at random, according to their own inaccurate 
appreciation of sounds carelessly, vulgarly, and corruptly uttered; and their maps of India are crowded with appellations which bear no similitude whatever either to past or present denominations. "We need not wonder that we cannot discover Sanskrit names in English maps, when, in the immediate vicinity of Calcutta, Barnagore represents Barahanagar, Dakshineswar is metamorphosed into Duckinsore, Ulubaria into Willoughbury.......There is scarcely a name in our Indian maps that does not afford proof of extreme indifference to accuracy in nomenclature, and of an incorrectness in estimating sounds, which is, in some degree, perhaps, a national defect.' 
For further information regarding the road from 
Ayodhya to Rajagriha, see Additional Notes.
Next: Canto LXX.: Bharat's Departure.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXX.: BHARAT'S DEPARTURE.
While thus he spoke, the envoys borne
On horses faint and travel-wornHad gained the city fenced aroundWith a deep moat's protecting bound.An audience of the king they gained,And honours from the prince obtained;The monarch's feet they humbly pressed,To Bharat next these words addressed:'The household priest and peers by usSend health to thee and greet thee thus:  Come to thy father's house with haste:Thine absent time no longer waste.Receive these vestures rich and rare,These costly gems and jewels fair,And to thy uncle here presentEach precious robe and ornament.These for the king and him suffice--Two hundred millions is their price--These, worth a hundred millions, beReserved, O large-eyed Prince, for thee.'   Loving his frieuds with heart and soul,The joyful prince received thie whole,Due honour to the envoys paid,And thus in turn his answer made:

'Of Das'aratha tidings tell:
Is the old king my father well?Is Ráma, and is Lakshman, heOf the high-soul, from sickness free?And she who walks where duty leads,Kaus'alyá known for gracious deeds,Mother of Ráma, loving spouse,Bound to her lord by well kept vows?And Lakshman's mother too, the dameSumitrá skilled in duty's claim,Who brave S'atrughna also bore,Second in age,--her health declare.
p. 178
And she, in self-conceit most sage,With selfish heart most prone to rage,My mother, fares she well? has sheSent message or command to me?'   Thus Bharat spake, the mighty-souled,And they in brief their tidings told:'All they of whom thou askest dwell,O lion lord, secure and well:Thine all the smiles of fortune are:Make ready; let them yoke the car.'   Thus by the royal envoys pressed,Bharat again the band addressed:'I go with you: no long delay,A single hour I bid you stay.'

Thus Bharat, son of him who swayed
Ayodhyás realm, his answer made,And then bespoke, his heart to please,His mother's sire in words like these:'I go to see my father, King,Urged by the envoys' summoning;And when thy soul desires to seeThy grandson, will return to thee.'   The king his grandsire kissed his head,And in reply to Bharat said:'Go forth, dear child: how blest is she,The mother of a son like thee!Greet well thy sire, thy mother greet,O thou whose arms the foe defeat;The household priest, and all the restAmid the Twice-born chief and best;And Ráma and brave Lakschman, whoShoot the long shaft with aim so true.'   To him the king high honour showed,And store of wealth and gifts bestowed,The choicest elephants to ride,And skins and blankets deftly dyed,A thousand strings of golden beads,And sixteen hundred mettled steeds:And boundless wealth before him piledGave Kekaya to Kaikeyás child.And men of counsel, good and tried,On whose firm truth he aye relied,King As'vapati gave with speed

Prince Bharat on his way to lead.
And noble elephants, strong and young,From sires of Indras'ira sprung,And others tall and fair to viewOf great Airávat's lineage true:And well yoked asses fleet of limbThe prince his uncle gave to him.And dogs within the palace bred,Of body vast and massive head,With mighty fangs for battle, brave,The tiger's match in strength, he gave.Yet Bharat's bosom hardly glowedTo see the wealth the king bestowed;For he would speed that hour away,Such care upon his bosom lay:Those eager envoys urged him thence,And that sad vision's influence.He left hia court-yard, crowded thenWith elephants and steeds and men,And, peerless in immortal fame,To the great royal street he came.He saw, as farther still he went,The inner rooms most excellent,And passed the doors, to him unclosed,Where check nor bar his way oppossd.There Bharat stayed to bid adieuTo grandsire and to uncle too,Then, with S'atrughna by his side,Mounting his car, away he hied.

The strong-wheeled cars were yoked, and
    theyMore than a hundred, rolled away:Servants, with horses, asses, kine,Followed their lord in endless line.So, guarded by his own right hand,   Forth high-souled Bharat hied,Surrounded by a lordly bandOn whom the king relied.Beside him sat S'atrughna dear,The scourge of trembling foes:Thus from the light of Indra's sphereA saint made perfect goes.
Next: Canto LXXI.: Bharat's Return.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXI.: BHARAT'S RETURN.
Then Bharat's face was eastward bent
As from the royal town he went.He reached Sudámá's farther side,And glorious, gazed upon the tide;Passed Hládiní, and saw her tossHer westering billows hard to cross.Then old Ikshváku's famous sonO'er S'atadrú 
1 his passage won,
Near Ailadhána on the strand,And came to Aparparyat's land.O'er S'ilás flood he hurried fast,Akurvatí's fair stream he passed,Crossed o'er A'gneya's rapid rill,And S'alyakartan onward still.S'ilávahá's swift stream he eyed,True to his vows and purified.Then crossed the lofty hills, and stoodIn Chaitraratha's mighty wood.He reached the confluence where meetSarasvatí 
2 and Gangá fleet,
And through Bhárunda forest, spreadNorthward of Víramatsya, sped.He sought Kalinda's child, who fills

p. 179
The soul with joy, begirt by hills,
Reached Yamuná and passing o'er,Rested his army on the shore:He gave his horses food and rest,Bathed reeking limb and drooping crest.They drank their fill and bathed them there,And water for their journey bare.Thence through a mighty wood he spedAll wild and uninhabited,As in fair chariot through the skies,Most fair in shape a Storm-God flies.At Ans'udhána Gangá, hardTo cross, his onward journey barred,So turning quickly thence he cameTo Prágvat's city dear to fame.There having gained the farther sideTo Kutikoshtiká he hied:The stream he crossed, and onward thenTo Dharmavardhan brought his men.Thence, leaving Toran on the north.To Jambuprastha journeyed forth.Then onward to a pleasant groveBy fair Varúha's town he drove,And when a while he there had stayed,Went eastward from the friendly shade.Eastward of Ujjiháná whereThe Priyak trees are tall and fair,

He passed, and rested there each steed
Kxhausted with the journey's speed.There orders to his men addressed,With quickened pace he onward pressed,A while at Sarvatirtha spent,Then o'er Uttániká he went.O'er many a stream beside he spedWith coursers on the mountains bred,And passing Hastiprishthak, tookThe road o'er Kutikás fair brook.Then, at Lohitya's village, heCrossed o'er the swift Kapívatí,Then passed, where Ekas'ála stands,The Sthánumatís flood and sands,And Gomatí of fair renownBy Vinata's delightful town.When to Kalinga near he drew,A wood of Sal trees charmed the view;That passed, the sun began to rise,And Bharat saw with happy eyes,Ayodhá's city, built and plannedBy ancient Manu's royal hand,Seven nights upon the road had passed,And when he saw the town at lastBefore him in her beauty spread,Thus Bharat to the driver said:'This glorious city from afar,Wherein pure groves and gardens are,Seems to my eager eyes to-day

A lifeless pile of yellow clay.
Through all her streets where erst a throngOf men and women streamed along,Uprose the multitudinous roar:To-day I hear that sound no more.No longer do mine eyes beholdThe leading people, as of old,On elephants, cars, horses, goAbroad and homeward, to and fro.The brilliant gardens, where we heardThe wild note of each rapturous bird.Where men and women loved to meet,In pleasant shades, for pastime sweet,--These to my eyes this day appearJoyless, and desolate, and drear;Each tree that graced the garden grieves,And every path is spread with leaves.The merry cry of bird and beast,That spake aloud their joy has ceased:Still is the long melodious noteThat charmed us from each warbling throat,Why blows the blessed air no more,The incense-breathing air that boreIts sweet incomparable scentOf sandal and of aloe blent?Why are the drum and tabour mute?Why is the music of the luteThat woke responsive to the quill,Loved by the happy, hushed and still?

My boding spirit gathers hence
Dire sins of awful consequence,And omens, crowding on my sight,Weigh down my soul with wild affrightScarce shall I find my friends who dwellHere in Ayodhyá safe and well:For surely not without a causeThis crushing dread my soul o'erawes.   Heart sick, dejected, every senseConfused by terror's influence,On to the town he quickly sweptWhich King Ikshváku's children kept.He passed through Vaijayanta's gate,With weary steeds, disconsolate.And all who near their station held,His escort. crying Victory, swelled,With heart distracted still he bowedFarewell to all the following crowd,Turned to the driver and beganTo question thus the weary man:.'Why was I brought, O free from blame,So fast, unknown for what I came?Yet fear of ill my heart appals,And all my wonted courage falls.For I have heard in days gone byThe changes seen when monarchs die;And all those signs. O charioteer,I see today surround me here:Each kinsman's house looks dark and grim,

No hand delights to keep it trim:
The beauty vanished. and the pride,The doors, unkept, stand open wide.No morning rites are offered there,No grateful incense loads the air,And all therein, with brows o'ercast,Sit joyless on the ground and fast.Their lovely chaplets dry and dead,
p. 180
Their courts unswept, with dust o'erspread,The temples of the Gods to-dayNo more look beautiful and gay.Neglected stands each holy shrine,Each image of a Lord divine.No shop where flowery wreaths are soldIs bright and busy as of old.The women and the men I markAbsorbed in fancies dull and dark,Their gloomy eyes with tears bedewed,A poor afflicted multitude.'
His mind oppressed with woe and dread,
Thus Bharat to his driver said,Viewed the dire signs Ayodhyá showed,And onward to the palace rode.

Footnotes
178:1 'The S'atadrú, 'the hundred-channeled' --the 
Zaradrus of Ptolemy, Hesydrus of Pliny--is the Sutlej.' 
WILSON'S Vishnu Purána, Vol. II. p. 130.
178:2 The Sarasvatí or Sursooty is a tributary of the 
Caggar or Guggur in Sirhind.
Next: Canto LXXII.: Bharat's Inquiry.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXII.: BHARAT'S INQUIRY.
He entered in, he looked around,
Nor in the house his father found;Then to his mother's dwelling, bentTo see her face, he quickly went.She saw her son, so long away,Returning after many a day,And from her golden seat in joySprung forward to her darling boy.Within the bower, no longer bright,Came Bharat lover of the right,And bending with observance sweetClasped his dear mother's lovely feet.Long kisses on his brow she pressed,And held her hero to her breast,Then fondly drew him to her knees,And questioned him in words like these:'How many nights have fled, since thouLeftest thy grandsire's home, till now?By flying steeds so swiftly borne,Art thou not weak and travel-worn?How fares the king my father, tell:Is Yudhájit thine uncle well?And now, my son, at length declareThe pleasure of the visit there.'

Thus to the offspring of the king
She spake with tender questioning,And to his mother made replyYoung Bharat of the lotus eye:'The seventh night has come and fledSince from my grandsire's home I sped:My mother's sire is well, and he,Yudhájit, from all trouble free.The gold and every precious thingPresented by the conqueror king,The slower guards behind convey:I left them weary on the way.Urged by the men my father sent,My hasty course I hither bent:Now, I implore, an answer deign,And all I wish to know, explain.
Unoccupied I now behold
This couch of thine adorned with gold,And each of King Ikshváku's raceAppears with dark and gloomy face.The king is aye, my mother dear,Most constant in his visits here.To meet my sire I sought this spot:How is it that I find him not?I long to clasp my father's feet:Say where he lingers, I entreat.Perchance the monarch may be seen

Where dwells Kaus'alyá, eldest queen.'
His father's fate, from him concealed.
Kaikeyí to her son revealed:Told as glad news the story sad,For lust of sway had made her mad:'Thy father, O my darling, know,Has gone the way all life must go:Devout and famed, of lofty thought,In whom the good their refuge sought.'
When Bharat pious, pure, and true,
Heard the sad words which pierced him through,Grieved for the sire he loved so wellProstrate upon the ground he fell:Down fell the strong-armed hero, highTossing his arms, and a sad cry,'Ah, woe is me, unhappy, slain!'Burst from his lips again, again,Afflicted for his father's fateBy grief's intolerable weight,With every sense amazed and cowedThe splendid hero wailed aloud:'Ah me, my royal father's bedOf old a gentle radiance shed,Like the pure sky when clouds are past,And the moon's light is o'er it cast:Ah, of its wisest lord bereft,It shows to-day faint radiance left,

As when the moon has left the sky.
Or mighty Ocean's depths are dry.'
With choking sobs, with many a tear.
Pierced to the heart with grief sincere,The best of conquerors poured his sighs,And with his robe veiled face and eyes.Kaikeyí saw him fallen there,Godlike, afflicted, in despair,Used every art to move him thence,And tried him thus with eloquence:'Arise, arise, my dearest; whyWilt thou, famed Prince, so lowly lie?Not by such grief as this are movedGood men like thee, by all approved.The earth thy father nobly swayed,And rites to Heaven he duly paid.At length his race of life was run:Thou shouldst not mourn for him, my son.'
Long on the ground he wept, and rolled
From side to side, still unconsoled,And then, with bitter grief oppressed,His mother with those words addressed:
p. 181
'This joyful hope my bosom fedWhen from my grandsire's halls I sped--

'The king will throne his eldest son,
And sacrifice, as should be done.'But all is changed, my hope was vain,And this sad heart is rent in twain,For my dear father's face I miss,Who ever sought his loved ones' bliss.But in my absence, mother, say,What sickness took my sire away?Ah, happy Ráma, happy theyAllowed his funeral rites to pay!The glorious monarch has not learnedThat I his darling have returned,Or quickly had he hither sped,And pressed his kisses on my head.Where is that hand whose gentle touch,Most soft and kind I loved so much,The hand that loved to brush awayThe dust that on his darling lay?Quick, bear the news to Ráma's ear;Tell the great chief that I am here:Brother, and sire, and friend, and allIs he, and I his trusty thrall,For noble hearts, to virtue true,Their sires in elder brothers view.To clasp his feet I fain would bow:He is my hope and refuge now.What said my glorious sire, who knewVirtue and vice, so brave and true?Firm in his vows, dear lady, say,

What said he ere he passed away?
What was his rede to me? I craveTo hear the last advice he gave.'
Thus closely questioned by the youth,
Kaikeyi spoke the mournful truth:'The high-souled monarch wept and sighed,For Ráma, Sítá, Lakshman, cried,Then, best of all who go to bliss,Passed to the world which follows this.'Ah, blessed are the people whoShall Ráma and his Sítá view, And Lakshman of the mighty arm,Returning free from scathe and harm.'Such were the words, the last of all,Thy father, ere he died, let fall,By Fate and Death's dread coils enwound,As some great elephant is bound.'
He heard, yet deeper in despair,
Her lips this double woe declare,And with sad brow that showed his painQuestioned his mother thus again:'But where is he, of virtue tried,Who fills Kaus'alyá's heart with pride,Where is the noble Ráma? whereIs Lakshman brave, and Sítá fair?'
Thus pressed, the queen began to tell

The story as each thing befell,
And gave her son in words like these,The mournful news she meant to please:'The prince is gone in hermit dressTo Dandak's mighty wilderness,And Lakshman brave and Sítá shareThe wanderings of the exile there.'
Then Bharat's soul with fear was stirred
Lest Ráma from the right had erred,And jealous for ancestral fame,He put this question to the dame:'Has Ráma grasped with lawless holdA Bráhman's house, or land, or gold?Has Ráma harmed with ill intentSome poor or wealthy innocent?Was Ráma, faithless to his vows,Enamoured of anothers spouse?Why was he sent to Dandak's wild,Like one who kills an unborn child?'
He questioned thus: and she began
To tell her deeds and crafty plan.Deceitful-hearted, fond, and blindAs is the way of womankind:'No Bráhman's wealth has Ráma seized,No dame his wandering fancy pleased;His very eyes he ne'er allowsTo gaze upon a neighbour's spouse,

But when I heard the monarch planned
To give the realm to Ráma's hand,I prayed that Ráma hence might flee,And claimed the throne, my son, for thee.The king maintained the name he bare,And did according to my prayer.And Ráma, with his brother, sent,And Sítá, forth to banishment.When his dear son was seen no more,The lord of earth was troubled sore:Too feeble with his grief to strive,He joined the elemental Five.Up then, most dutiful! maintainThe royal state, arise, and reign.For thee, my darling son, for theeAll this was planned and wrought by me.Come, cast thy grief and pain aside,With manly courage fortified.This town and realm are all thine own,And fear and grief are here unknown.Come, with Vas'ishtha's guiding aid,   And priests in ritual skilledLet the king's funeral dues be paid,   And every claim fulfilled.Perform his obsequies with all   That suits his rank and worth,Then give the mandate to install   Thyself as lord of earth.'

Next: Canto LXXIII.: Kaikeyí Reproached.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXIII.: KAIKEYÍ REPROACHED.
But when he heard the queen relate
His brothers' doom, his father's fate,Thus Bharat to his mother saidWith burning grief disquieted:
p. 182
'Alas, what boots it now to reign,Struck down by grief and well-nigh slain?Ah, both are gone, my sire, and heWho was a second sire to me.Grief upon grief thy hand has made,And salt upon gashes laid:For my dear sire has died through thee,And Ráma roams a devotee.Thou camest like the night of FateThis royal house to devastate.Unwitting ill, my hapless sirePlaced in his bosom coals of fire,And through thy crimes his death he met,O thou whose heart on sin is set.Shame of thy house! thy senseless deedHas reft all joy from Raghu's seed.The truthful monarch, dear to fame,

Received thee as his wedded dame,
And by thy act to misery doomedHas died by flames of grief consumed.Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá tooThe coming of my mother rue.And if they live oppressed by woe,For their dear sons their sad tears flow.Was he not ever good and kind,--That hero of the duteous mind?Skilled in all filial duties, heAs a dear mother treated thee.Kaus'alyá too, the eldest queen,Who far foresees with insight keen,Did she not ever show thee allA sister's love at duty's call?And hast thou from the kingdom chasedHer son, with bark around his waist,To the wild wood, to dwell therein,And dost not sorrow for thy sin?The love bare to Raghu's sonThou knewest not, ambitious one,If thou hast wrought this impious deedFor royal sway, in lawless greed.With him and Lakshman far away,What power have I the realm to sway?What hope will fire my bosom whenI see no more these lords of men?The holy king who loved the rightRelied on Ráma's power and might,

His guardian and his glory, so
(illegible) Meru in his woods below.How can I bear, a steer untrained,The load his mightier strength sustained?What power have I to brook aloneThis weight on feeble shoulders thrown?For if the needful power were boughtBy strength of mind and brooding thought,No triumph shall attend the dameWho dooms her son to lasting shame.Now should no doubt that son preventFrom quitting thee on evil bent.But Ráma's love o'erpowers my will,Who holds thee as his mother still.Whence did the thought, O thou whose eyesAre turned to sinful deeds, arise--A plan our ancient sires would hate,O fallen from thy virtuous state?For in the line from which we springThe eldest is anointed king:No monarchs from the rule decline,And, least of all. lkshváku's line.Our holy sires, to virtue true,Upon our race a lustre threw,But with subversive frenzy thouHast marred our lineal honour now,Of lofty birth, a noble lineOf previous kings is also thine:Then whence this hated folly? whence

This sudden change that steals thy sense?
Thou shalt not gain thine impious will,O thou whose thoughts are bent on ill,Thou from whose guilty hand descendThese sinful blows my life to end.Now to the forest will I go,Thy cherished plans to overthrow,And bring my brother, free from stain,His people's darling, home again,And Ráma, when again he turns,Whose glory like a beacon burns,In me a faithful slave shall findTo serve him with contented mind.'
Next: Canto LXXIV.: Bharat's Lamest.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXIV.: BHARAT'S LAMEST.
When Bharat's anger-sharpened tongue
Reproaches on the queen had flung,Again, with mighty rage possessed,The guilty dame he thus addressed:'Flee, cruel, wicked sinner, flee,Let not this kingdom harbour thee.Thou who hast thrown all right aside,Ween thou for me when I have died.Canst thou one charge against the king,Or the most duteous Ráma bring?The one thy sin to death has sent,The other chased to banishment.Our line's destroyer, sin defiledLike one who kills an unborn child,Ne'er with thy lord in heaven to dwell,Thy portion shall be down in hellBecause thy hand, that stayed for naught,This awful wickedness has wrought,And ruined him whom all held dear,My bosom too is stirred with fear.My father by thy sin is dead,And Ráma to the wood is fled;And of thy deed I bear the stain,And fameless in the world remain.

Ambitious, evil-souled. in show
My mother, yet my direst foe.My throning ne'er thine eyes shall bless,Thy husband's wicked murderess.
p. 183
Thou art not As'vapati's child,That righteous king most sage and mild,But thou wast born a fiend, a foeMy father's house to overthrow.Thou who hast made Kaus'alyá, pure,Gentle, affectionate, endureThe loss of him who was her bliss--What worlds await thee, Queen, for this?Was it not patent to thy senseThat Ráma was his friends' defence,Kaus'alyá's own true child most dear,The eldest and his father's peer?Men in the son not only traceThe father's figure, form, and face,But in his heart they also findThe offspring of the father's mind;And hence, though dear their kinsmen are,To mothers sons are dearer far.There goes an ancient legend howGood Surabhi, the God-loved cow,Saw two of her dear children strain,Drawing a plough and faint with pain.

She saw them on the earth outworn,
Toiling till noon from early morn,And as she viewed her children's woe,A flood of tears began to flow.As through the air beneath her sweptThe Lord of Gods, the drops she wept,Fine, laden with delicious smell,Upon his heavenly body fell,And Indra lifted up his eyesAnd saw her standing in the skies,Afflicted with her sorrow's weight,Sad, weeping, all disconsolate.The Lord of Gods in anxious moodThus spoke in suppliant attitude:'No fear disturbs our rest, and howComes this great dread upon thee now?Whence can this woe upon thee fall,Say, gentle one who lovest all?'
Thus spake the God who rules the skies,
Indra, the Lord supremely wise;And gentle Surabhi, well learnedIn eloquence, this speech returned:'Not thine the fault, great God, not thineAnd guiltless are the Lords divine:I mourn two children faint with toil,Labouring hard in stubborn soil,Wasted and sad I see them now,While the sun beats on neck and brow,

Still goaded by the cruel hind,--
No pity in his savage mind.O Indra, from this body sprangThese children, worn with many a pang.For this sad sight I mourn, for noneIs to the mother like her son.'
He saw her weep whose offspring feed
In thousands over hill and mead,And knew that in a mother's eyeNaught with a son, for love, can vie.He deemed her, when the tears that cameFrom her sad eyes bedewed his frame,Laden with their celestial scent,Of living things most excellent,If she these tears of sorrow shedWho many a thousand children bred,Think what a life of woe is leftKaus'alyá, of her Ráma reft.An only son was hers and sheIs rendered childless now by thee.Here and hereafter, for thy crime,Woe is thy lot through endless time.And now, O Queen, without delay,With all due honour will I payBoth to my brother and my sireThe rites their several fates require.Back to Ayodhyá will I bringThe long-armed chief, her lord and king,

And to the wood myself betake
Where hermit saints their dwelling make.For, sinner both in deed and thought!This hideous crime which thou hast wroughtI cannot bear, or live to seeThe people's sad eyes bent on me.Begone, to Dandak wood retire,Or cast thy body to the fire,Or bind around thy neck the rope:No other refuge mayst thou hope.When Ráma, lord of valour true,Has gained the earth, his right and due,Then, free from duty's binding debt,My vanished sin shall I forget.'
Thus like an elephant forced to brook
The goading of the driver's hook,Quick panting like a serpent maimed,He fell to earth with rage inflamed.
Next: Canto LXXV.: The Abjuration.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXV.: THE ABJURATION.
A while he lay: he rose at length,
And slowly gathering sense and strength,With angry eyes which tears bedewed,The miserable queen he viewed,And spake with keen reproach to herBefore each lord and minister:'No lust have I for kingly sway,My mother I no more obey:Naught of this consecration knewWhich Das'aratha kept in view,I with S'atrughna all the timeWas dwelling in a distant clime:I knew of Ráma's exile naught,That hero of the noble thought:I knew not how fair Sítá went,And Lakshman, forth to banishment.'
Thus high-souled Bharat, mid the crowd,
Lifted his voice and cried aloud.
p. 184
Kaus'alyá heard, she raised ner head.

And quickly to Sumitrá said:
'Bharat, Kaikeyí's son, is here,--Hers whose fell deeds I loathe and fear:That youth of foresight keen I fainWould meet and see his face again.'Thus to Sumitrá spake the dame,And straight to Bharat's presence cameWith altered mien, neglected dress,Trembling and faint with sore distress.Bharat, S'atrughna by his side,To meet her, toward her palace hied.And when the royal dame they viewedDistressed with dire solicitude,Sad, fallen senseless on the ground,About her neck their arms they wound.The noble matron prostrate there,Embraced, with tears, the weeping pair,And with her load of grief oppressed,To Bharat then these words addressed:'Now all is thine, without a foe,This realm for which thou longest so.Ah, soon Kaikeyí's ruthless handHas won the empire of the land,And made my guiltless Ráma fleeDressed like some lonely devotee.Herein what profit has the queen,Whose eye delights in havoc, seen?Me also, me 'twere surely goodTo banish to the distant wood,

To dwell amid the shades that hold
My famous son with limbs like gold.Nay, with the sacred fire to guide,Will I, Sumitrá by my side,Myself to the drear wood repairAnd seek the son of Raghu there.This land which rice and golden cornAnd wealth of every kind adorn,Car, elephant, and steed, and gem,--She makes thee lord of it and them.'
With taunts like these her bitter tongue
The heart of blameless Bharat wrungAnd direr pangs his bosom toreThan when the lancet probes a sore.With troubled senses all astrayProne at her feet he fell and lay.With loud lament a while he plained,And slowly strength and sense regained.With suppliant hand to hand appliedHe turned to her who wept and sighed,And thus bespake the queen, whose breastWith sundry woes was sore distressed:'Why these reproaches, noble dame?I, knowing naught, am free from blame.Thou knowest well what love was mineFor Ráma, chief of Raghu's line.O, never be his darkened mindTo Scripture's guiding lore inclined,

By whose consent the prince who led
The good, the truthful hero, fled.May he obey the vilest lord,Offend the sun with act abhorred,  
1
And strike a sleeping cow, who lentHis voice to Ráma's banishment.May the good king who all befriends,And, like his sons, the people tends,Be wronged by him who gave consentTo noble Ráma's banishment.On him that king's injustice fall,Who takes, as lord, a sixth of all,Nor guards, neglectful of his trust,His people, as a ruler must.The crime of those who swear to fee,At holy rites, some devotee,And then the promised gift deny,Be his who willed the prince should fly,When weapons clash and heroes bleed,With elephant and harnessed steed,Ne'er, like the good, be his to fightWhose heart allowed the prince's flight.Though taught with care by one expertMay he the Veda's text pervert,With impious mind on evil bent,Whose voice approved the banishment.Mav he with traitor lips revealWhate'er he promised to conceal,And bruit abroad his friend's offence,

Betrayed by generous confidence.
No wife of equal lineage bornThe wretch's joyless home adorn:Ne'er may he do one virtuous deed,And dying see no child succeed.When in the battle's awful dayFierce warriors stand in dread array,Let the base coward turn and fly,And smitten by the foeman, die.Long may he wander, rags his wear,Doomed in his hand a skull to bear,And like an idiot beg his bread,Who gave consent when Rama fled.His sin who holy rites forgets,Asleep when shows the sun and sets,A load upon his soul shall lieWhose will allowed the prince to fly.His sin who loves his Master's dame,His, kindler of destructive flame.His who betrays his trusting friendShall, mingled all, on him descend.By him no reverence due be paidTo blessed God or parted shade:May sire and mother's sacred nameIn vain from him obedience claim.Ne'er may he go where dwell the good,Nor win their fame and neighbourhood,But lose all hopes of bliss to day,Who willed the prince should flee away.

May he deceive the poor and weak
Who look to him and comfort seek,
p. 185
Betray the suppliants who complain,And make the hopeful hope in vain.Long may his wife his kiss expect,And pine away in cold neglect.May he his lawful love despise,And turn on other dames his eyes,Fool, on forbidden joys intent,Whose will allowed the banishment.His sin who deadly poison throwsTo spoil the water as it flows,Lay on the wretch its burden dreadWho gave consent when Rama fled.' 
1
Thus with his words he undeceivedKaus'alyá's troubled heart, who grievedFor son and husband reft away;Then prostrate on the ground he lay.Him as he lay half-senseless there,Freed by the mighty oaths he sware,Kaus'alyá, by her woe distressed,With melancholy words addressed:'Anew, my son, this sorrow springsTo rend my heart with keener stings:These awful oaths which thou hast sworn

My breast with double grief have torn.
Thy soul, and faithful Lakshman's too,Are still, thank Heaven! to virtue true.True to thy promise, thou shalt gainThe mansions which the good obtain.'
Then to her breast that youth she drew,
Whose sweet fraternal love she knew,And there in strict embraces heldThe hero, as her tears outwelled.And Bharat's heart grew sick and faintWith grief and oft-renewed complaint,And all his senses were distraughtBy the great woe that in him wrought.Thus he lay and still bewailed   With sighs and loud lamentTill all his strength and reason failed,   The hours of night were spent.
Footnotes
184:1 S'úryamcha pratimehata, adversus solem mingat. 
An offence expressly forbidden by the Laws of Manu.
Next: Canto LXXVI.: The Funeral

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXVI.: THE FUNERAL
The saint Vas'ishtha, best of all
Whose words with moving wisdom fall,Bharat, Kaikeyí's son, addressed,Whom burning *?fires of grief distressed:'O Prince, whose fame is widely spread,Enough of grief: be comforted.The time is come: arise, and layUpon the pyre the monarch's clay.'
He heard the words Vas'ishtha spoke,
And slumbering resolution woke.Then skilled in all the laws declare,He bade his friends the rites prepareThey raised, the body from the oil,And placed it, dripping, on the soil;Then laid it on a bed, whereonWrought gold and precious jewels shone.There, pallor o'er his features spread,The monarch, as in sleep, lay dead.Then Bharat sought his father's side,And lifted up his voice and cried:'O King, and has thy heart designedTo part and leave thy son behind?Make Ráma flee, who loves the right,

And Lakshman of the arm of might?
Whither, great Monarch, wilt thou goAnd leave this people in their woe.Mourning their hero, wild with grief,Of Ráma reft, their lion chief?Ah, who will guard the people wellWho in Ayodhyá's city dwell,When thou, my sire, hast sought the sky,And Ráma has been forced to fly?In widowed woe, bereft of thee,The land no more is fair to *see*The city, to my aching sight,Is gloomy as a moonless night.'
Thus, with o'erwhelming sorrow pained,
Sad Bharat by the bed complained:And thus Vas'ishtha, holy sage,Spoke his deep anguish to assuage:'O Lord of men, no longer stay;The last remaining duties pay:Haste, mighty-armed, as I advise,The funeral rites to solemnize.'
And Bharat heard Vas'ishtha's rede
With due attention and agreed.He summoned straight from every sideChaplain, and priest, and holy guide.The sacred fires he bade them bringForth from the ohapel of the king,

Wherein the priests in order due,
And ministers, the offerings threw,Distraught in mind, with sob and tear,They laid the body on a bier,And servants, while their eyes brimmed o'erThe monarch from the palace bore,Another band of mourners ledThe long procession of the dead:Rich garments in the way they cast,And gold and silver, as they passed,Then other hands the corse bedewedWith fragrant juices that exudeFrom sandal, cedar, aloe, pine,And every perfume rare and fine.Then priestly hands the mighty deadUpon the pyre deposited.The sacred fires they tended next,And muttered low each funeral text;And priestly singers who rehearse
p. 186
The S'aman  1 sang their holy verse.
Forth from the town in litters came,Or chariots, many a royal dame,And honoured so the funeral ground,With aged followers ringed around.With steps in inverse order bent,  
2
The priests in sad procession went

Around the monarch's burning pyre
Who well had nursed each sacred fire:With Queen Kaus'alyá and the rest,Their tender hearts with woe distressed,The voice of women, shrill and clearAs screaming curlews, smote the ear,As from a thousand voices roseThe shriek that tells of woman's woes.Then weeping, faint, with loud lament,Down Sarjú's shelving bank they went.   There standing on the river side     With Bharat, priest, and peer,   Their lips the women purified     With water fresh and clear.   Returning to the royal town,     Their eyes with tear-drops filled,   Ten days on earth they laid them down,     And wept till grief was stilled.
Footnotes
185:1 Bharat does not intend these curses for any 
particular person: he merely wishes to prove his own 
innocence by invoking them on his own head if he had any share in banishing Ráma.

Next: Canto LXXVII.: The Gathering of The Ashes.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXVII.: THE GATHERING OF 
THE ASHES.
The tenth day passed: the prince again
Was free from every legal stain.Ha bade them on the twelfth the greatRemaining honour celebrate.Much gold he gave, and gems, and food,To all the Bráhman multitude,And goats whose hair was white and fine,And many a thousand head of kine:Slaves, men and damsels, he bestowed,And many a car and fair abode:Such gifts he gave the Bráhman raceHis father's obsequies to grace.Then when the morning's earliest rayAppeared upon the thirteenth day,Again the hero wept and sighedDistraught and sorrow-stupefied;Drew, sobbing in his anguish, near,The last remaining debt to clear,And at the bottom of the pyre,He thus bespake his royal sire:'O father, hast thou left me so,Deserted in my friendless woe,

When he to whom the charge was given
To keep me, to the wood is driven?Her only son is forced awayWho was his helpless mother's stay:
Ah, whither, father, art thou fled;
Leaving the queen uncomforted?'
He looked upon the pile where lay
The bones half-burnt and ashes grey,And uttering a piteous moan,Gave way, by anguish overthrown.Then as his tears began to well,Prostrate to earth the hero fell;So from its seat the staff they drag,And cast to earth some glorious flag.The ministers approached againThe prince whom rites had freed from stain:So when Yayáti fell, each seer,In pity for his fate, drew near.S'atrughna saw him lying lowO'erwhelmed beneath the crush of woe,And as upon the king he thought,He fell upon the earth distraught.When to his loving memory cameThose noble gifts, that kingly frame,He sorrowed, by his woe distressed,As one by frenzied rage possessed:'Ah me, this surging sea of woe

Has drowned us with its overflow:
The source is Manthará, dire and dark,Kaikeyí is the ravening shark:And the great boons the monarch gaveLend conquering might to every wave.Ah, whither wilt thou go, and leaveThy Bharat in his woe to grieve,Whom ever 'twas thy greatest joyTo fondle as a tender boy?Didst thou not give with thoughtful careOur food, our drink, our robes to wear?Whose love will now for us provide,When thou, our king and sire, hast died?At such a time bereft, forlorn,Why is not earth in sunder torn,Missing her monarch's firm control,His love of right, his lofty soul?Ah me, for Ráma roams afar,My sire is where the Blessed are;How can I live deserted? IWill pass into the fire and die.Abandoned thus, I will not brookUpon Ayodhyá's town to look,Once guarded by Ikshváku's race:The wood shall be my dwelling place.'
Then when the princes' mournful train
Heard the sad brothers thus complain,And saw their misery, at the view

Their grief burst wilder out anew.
Faint with lamenting, sad and worn,Each like a bull with broken horn,The brothers in their wild despairLay rolling, mad with misery, there.Then old Vas'ishtha good and true,Their father's priest, all lore who knew,Raised weeping Bharat on his feet,And thus bespake with counsel meet:'Twelve days, my lord, have past away
p. 187
Since flames consumed thy father's clay:Delay no more: as rules ordain,Gather what bones may yet remain.Three constant pairs are ever foundTo hem all mortal creatures round:  
1
Then mourn not thus, O Prince, for noneTheir close companionship may shun.'   Sumantra bade S'atrughna rise,And soothed his soul with counsel wise,And skilled in truth, his hearer taughtHow all things are and come to naught,When rose each hero from the ground,A lion lord of men, renowned,He showed like Indra's flag, 
2 whereon
Fierce rains have dashed and suns have shone.They wiped their red and weeping eyes,

And gently made their sad replies:
Then, urged to haste, the royal pairPerformed the rites that claimed their care.
Footnotes
186:1 The Sáma-veda, the hymns of which are chanted 
aloud.
186:2 Walking from right to left.
Next: Canto LXXVIII.: Manthará Punished.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXVIII.: MANTHARÁ PUNISHED.
Satrughna thus to Bharat spake
Who longed the forest road to take:'He who in woe was wont to giveStrength to himself and all that live--Dear Ráma, true and pure in heart,Is banished by a woman's art.Yet here was Lakshman, brave and strong,Could not his might prevent the wrong?Could not his arm the king restrain,Or make the banished free again?One loving right and fearing crimeHad checked the monarch's sin in time,When, vassal of a woman's will,His feet approached the path of ill.'   While Lakshman's younger brother, dreadS'atrughna, thus to Bharat said,Came to the fronting door, arrayedIn glittering robes, the hump-back maid.There she, with sandal-oil besmeared,In garments meet for queens appeared:And lustre to her form was lentBy many a gem and ornament.She girdled with her broidered zone,And many a chain about her thrown,

Showed like a female monkey round
Whose body many a string is bound.When on that cause of evil fellThe quick eye of the sentinel,
He grasped her in his ruthless hold,
And hastening in, S'atrughna told:'Here is the wicked pest,' he cried,'Through whom the king thy father died,And Ráma wanders in the wood:Do with her as thou deemest good.'The warder spoke: and every wordS'atrughna's breast to fury stirred:He called the servants all and each.And spake in wrath his hasty speech:'This is the wretch my sire who slew,And misery on my brothers drew:Let her this day obtain the meed,Vile sinner, of her cruel deed.'He spake; and moved by fury laidHis mighty hand upon the maid,Who as her fellows ringed her round.Made with her cries the hall resound,Soon as the gathered women viewedS'atrughna in his angry mood,Their hearts disturbed by sudden dread,They turned and from his presence fled.'His rage,' they cried, 'on us will fall,And ruthless, he will slay us all.

Come, to Kaus'alyá let us flee:
Our hope, our sure defence is she,Approved by all, of virtuous mind,Compassionate, and good, and kind.'   His eyes with burning wrath aglow,S'atrughna, shatterer of the foe,Dragged on the ground the hump-back maidWho shrieked aloud and screamed for aid.This way and that with no remorseHe dragged her with resistless force,And chains and glittering trinkets burstLay here and there with gems dispersed,Till like the sky of Autumn shoneThe palace floor they sparkled on.The lord of men, supremely strong,Haled in his rage the wretch along:Where Queen Kaikeyí dwelt he came,And sternly then addressed the dame.Deep in her heart Kaikeyí feltThe stabs his keen reproaches dealt,And of S'atrughna's ire afraid,To Bharat flew and cried for aid.He looked and saw the prince inflamedWith burning rage, and thus exclaimed:'Forgive! thine angry arm restrain:A woman never may be slain,My hand Kaikeyí's blood would spill,The sinner ever bent on ill,But Ráma, long in duty tried,

Would hate the impious matricide:
And if he knew thy vengeful bladeHad slaughtered e'en this hump-back maid,Never again, be sure, would heSpeak friendly word to thee or me."   When Bharat's speech S'atrughna heardHe calmed the rage his breast that stirred,
p. 188
Releasing from her dire constraintThe trembling wretch with terror faint.Then to Kaikeyí's feet she crept,And prostrate in her misery wept.Kaikeyí on the hump-back gazed,  And saw her weep and gasp.Still quivering, with her senses dazed,  From fierce S'atrughna's grasp.With gentle words of pity she  Assuaged her wild despair.Even as a tender hand might free  A curlew from the snare.
Footnotes
187:1 Birth and death, pleasure and pain, loss and gain.

187:2 Erected upon a tree or high staff in honour of 
Indra.
Next: Canto LXXIX.: Bharat's Commands.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXIX.: BHARAT'S COMMANDS.
Now when the sun's returning ray
Had ushered in the fourteenth day,The gathered peers of state addressedTo Bharat's ear their new request:'Our lord to heaven has parted hence,Long served with deepest reverence;Ráma, the eldest, far from home,And Lakshman, in the forest roam.O Prince, of mighty fame, be thouOur guardian and our monarch now,Lest secret plot or foeman's hateAssail our unprotected stateWith longing eyes, O Lord of men,To thee look friend and citizen,And ready is each sacred thingTo consecrate our chosen king.Come, Bharat, and accept thine ownAncient hereditary throne.Thee let the priests this day installAs monarch to preserve us all.'  Around the sacred gear he bentHis circling footsteps reverent,And, firm to vows he would not break,Thus to the gathered people spake:

'The eldest son is ever king:
So rules the house from which we spring:Nor should ye, Lords, like men unwise,With words like these to wrong advise.Ráma is eldest born, and heThe ruler of the land shall be.Now to the woods will I repair,Five years and nine to lodge me there.Assemble straight a mighty force,Cars, elephants, and foot and horse,For I will follow on his trackAnd bring my eldest brother back.Whate'er the rites of throning needPlaced on a car the way shall lead:The sacred vessels I will takeTo the wild wood for Ráma's sake,I o'er the lion prince's headThe sanctifying balm will shed,And bring him, as the fire they bringForth from the shrine, with triumphing.Nor will I let my mother's greedIn this her cherished aim succeed:In pathless wilds will I remain,And Ráma here as king shall reign.To make the rough ways smooth and clearSend workman out and pioneer:Let skilful men attend besideOur way through pathless spots to guide.'As thus the royal Bharat spake,

Ordaining all for Ráma's sake,
The audience gave with one accordAuspicious answer to their lord:'Be royal Fortune aye benignTo thee for this good speech of thine,Who wishest still thine elder's handTo rule with kingly sway the land.'  Their glorious speech, their favouring cries    Made his proud bosom swell:  And from the prince's noble eyes    The tears of rapture fell.  
1
Next: Canto LXXX.: The Way Prepared.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXX.: THE WAY PREPARED.
All they who knew the joiner's art,
Or distant ground in every part;Each busied in his several trade,To work machines or ply the spade;Deft workmen skilled to frame the wheel,Or with the ponderous engine deal;Guides of the way, and craftsmen skilled,To sink the well, make bricks, and build;And those whose hands the tree could hew,And work with slips of cut bamboo,Went forward, and to guide them, theyWhose eyes before had seen the way.Then onward in triumphant moodWent all the mighty multitude.Like the great sea whose waves leap highWhen the full moon is in the sky.Then, in his proper duty skilled,Each joined him to his several guild,And onward in advance they wentWith every tool and implement.Where bush and tangled creeper layWith trenchant steel they made the way;They felled each stump, removed each stone,And many a tree was overthrown.

In other spots, on desert lands,
Tall trees were reared by busy hands.Where'er the line of road they took,They plied the hatchet, axe, and hook.
p. 189
Others, with all their strength applied,Cast vigorous plants and shrubs aside,In shelving valleys rooted deep,And levelled every dale and steep.Each pit and hole that stopped the wayThey filled with stones, and mud, and clay.And all the ground that rose and fellWith busy care was levelled well.They bridged ravines with ceaseless toil,And pounded fine the flinty soil.Now here, now there, to right and left,A passage through the ground they cleft,And soon the rushing flood was ledAbundant through the new-cut bed,Which by the running stream suppliedWith ocean's boundless waters vied.In dry and thirsty spots they sankFull many a well and ample tank,And altars round about them placedTo deck the station in the waste.With well-wrought plaster smoothly spread,With bloomy trees that rose o'erhead,

With banners waving in the air,
And wild birds singing here and there,With fragrant sandal-water wet,With many a flower beside it set,Like the Gods' heavenly pathway showedThat mighty host's imperial road.Deft workmen, chosen for their skillTo do the high-souled Bharat's will,In every pleasant spot where grewTrees of sweet fruit and fair to view,As he commanded, toiled to graceWith all delights his camping-place.And they who read the stars, and wellEach lucky sign and hour could tell,Raised carefully the tented shadeWherein high-minded Bharat stayed.With ample space of level ground,With broad deep moat encompassed round;Like Mandar in his towering pride,With streets that ran from side to side;Enwreathed with many a palace tallSurrounded by its noble wall;With roads by skilful workmen made.Where many a glorious banner played;With stately mansions, where the doveSat nestling in her cote above.Rising aloft supremely fairLike heavenly cars that float in air,Each camp in beauty and in bliss

Matched Indra's own metropolis.
  As shines the heaven on some fair night,   With moon and constellations filled.  The prince's royal road was bright,   Adorned by art of workmen skilled.
Footnotes
188:1 I follow in this stanza the Bombay edition in 
preference to Schlegel's which gives the tears of joy to 
the courtiers.
Next: Canto LXXXI.: The Assembly.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXXI.: THE ASSEMBLY.
Ere yet the dawn had ushered in
The day should see the march begin,Herald and bard who rightly knewEach nice degree of honour due,Their loud auspicious voices raised.And royal Bharat blessed and praised.With sticks of gold the drum they smote,Which thundered out its deafening note,Blew loud the sounding shell, and blentEach high and low-toned instrument.The mingled sound of drum and hornThrough all the air was quickly borne,And as in Bharat's ear it rang,Gave the sad prince another pang.  Then Bharat starting from repose,Stilled the glad sounds that round him rose,'I am not king--no more mistake:'Then to S'atrughna thus he spake:'O see what general wrongs succeedSprung from Kaikeyí's evil deed!The king my sire has died and thrownFresh miseries on me alone.The royal bliss, on duty based.Which our just high-souled father graced,

Wanders in doubt and sore distress
Like a tossed vessel rudderless.And he who was our lordly stayRoams in the forest far away,Expelled by this my mother, whoTo duty's law is most untrue.'  As royal Bharat thus gave ventTo bitter grief in wild lament,Gazing upon his face the crowdOf pitying women wept aloud.His lamentation scarce was o'er,When Saint Vas'ishtha, skilled in loreOf royal duty, dear to fame,To join the great assembly came.Girt by disciples ever trueStill nearer to that hall he drew,Resplendent, heavenly to behold,Adorned with wealth of gems and gold:E'en so a man in duty triedDraws near to meet his virtuous bride.He reached his golden seat o'erlaidWith coverlet of rich brocade.There sat, in all the Vedas read,And called the messengers, and said:'Go forth, let Bráhman, Warrior, peer,And every captain gather here:Let all attentive hither throng:Go, hasten: we delay too long.S'atrughna, glorious Bharat bring,

The noble children of the king,  1
p. 190
Yudhájit  1 and Sumantra, all
The truthful and the virtuous call,'
   He ended: soon a mighty soundOf thickening tumult rose around,As to the hall they bent their courseWith car, and elephant, and horse,The people all with glad acclaimWelcomed Prince Bharat as he came:E'en as they loved their king to greet,Or as the Gods Lord Indra  
2 meet.
   The vast assembly shone as fair     With Bharat's kingly face   As Das'aratha's self were there     To glorify the place.   It gleamed like some unruffled lake     Where monsters huge of mould   With many a snake their pastime take     O'er shells, sand, gems, and gold.
Footnotes
189:1 The commentator says 'S'atrughna accompanied 

by the other sons of the king.'
Next: Canto LXXXII.: The Departure.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXXII.: THE DEPARTURE.
The prudent prince the assembly viewed
Thronged with its noble multitude,Resplendent as a cloudless nightWhen the full moon is in his height;While robes of every varied hueA glory o'er the synod threw.The priest in lore of duty skilledLooked on the crowd the hall that filled,And then in accents soft and graveTo Bharat thus his counsel gave:'The king, dear son, so good and wise,Has gone from earth and gained the skies,Leaving to thee, her rightful lord,This rich wide land with foison stored.And still has faithful Ráma stoodFirm to the duty of the good,And kept his father's host aright,As the moon keeps its own dear light.Thus sire and brother yield to theeThis realm from all annoyance free:Bejoice thy lords: enjoy thine own:Anointed king, ascend the throne.Let vassal Princes hasten forthFrom distant lands, west, south, and north,

From Kerala,  3 from every sea,
And bring ten million gems to thee.'
As thus the sage Vas'ishtha spoke,A storm of grief o'er Bharat broke.And longing to he just and true,
His thoughts to duteous Ráma flew.
With sobs and sighs and broken tones,E'en as a wounded mallard moans,He mourned with deepest sorrow moved,And thus the holy priest reproved:'O, how can such as Bharat dareThe power and sway from him to tear,Wise, and devout, and true, and chaste,With Scripture lore and virtue graced?Can one of Das'aratha's seedBe guilty of so vile a deed?The realm and I are Ráma's: thou,Shouldst speak the words of justice now.For he, to claims of virtue true,Is eldest born and noblest too:Nahush, Dilîpa could not beMore famous in their lives than he.As Das'aratha ruled of right,So Ráma's is the power and right.If I should do this sinful deedAnd forfeit hope of heavenly need,My guilty act would dim the shineOf old Ikshváku's glorious line.

Nay, as the sin my mother wrought
Is grievous to my inmost thought,I here, my hands together laid,Will greet him in the pathless shade,To Ráma shall my steps be bent,My King, of men most excellent,Raghu's illustrious son, whose swayMight, hell, and earth, and heaven obey.'   That righteous speech, whose every wordBore virtue's, stamp, the audience heard;On Ráma every thought was set,And with glad tears each eye was wet.'Then, if the power I still should lackTo bring my noble brother back,I in the wood will dwell, and shareHis banishment with Lakshman there.By every art persuasive ITo bring him from the wood will try,And show him to your loving eyes.O Brahmans noble, good, and wise.E'en now, the road to make and clear,Each labourer pressed, and pioneerHave I sent forward to precedeThe army I resolve to lead.'   Thus, by fraternal love possessed,His firm resolve the prince expressed.Then to Sumantra, deeply readIn holy texts, he turned and said:'Sumantra, rise without delay,

And as I bid my words obey.
Give orders for the march with speed,And all the army hither lead.'   The wise Sumantra, thus addressed,Obeyed the high-souled chief's behest.He hurried forth with joy inspiredAnd gave the orders he desired.Delight each soldier's bosom filled,Aud through each chief and captain thrilled,
p. 191
To hear that march proclaimed, to bringDear Ráma back from wandering.From house to house the tidings flew:Each soldier's wife the order knew,And as she listened blithe and gayHer husband urged to speed away.Captain and soldier soon declaredThe host equipped and all preparedWith chariots matching thought for speed,And wagons drawn by ox and steed.When Bharat by Vás'ishtha's side,His ready host of warriors eyed,Thus in Sumantra's ear he spoke.:'My car and horses quickly yoke.'Sumantra hastened to fulfilWith ready joy his master's will,And quickly with the chariot sped

Drawn by fleet horses nobly bred.
Then glorious Bharat, true, devout,Whose genuine valour none could doubt,Gave in fit words his order out;For he would seek the shadeOf the great distant wood, and thereWin his dear brother with his prayer:'Sumantra, haste! my will declare   The host be all arrayed.I to the wood my way will take,To Ráma supplication make,And for the world's advantage sake,   Will lead him home again.'Then, ordered thus, the charioteerWho listened with delighted ear,Went forth and gave his orders clear   To captains of the train.He gave the popular chiefs the word,And with the news his friends he stirred,And not a single man deferred   Preparing for the road.Then Bráhman, Warrior, Merchant, thrall,Obedient to Sumantra's call,Each in his house arose, and allYoked elephant or camel tall,Or ass or noble steed in stall,   And full appointed showed.

Footnotes
190:1 Not Bharat's uncle, but some councillor.
190:2 S'atakratu, Lord of a hundred sacrifices, the 
performance of a hundred As'vamedhas or sacrifices of 
a horse entitling the sacrificer to this exalted dignity.
190:3 The modern Malabar.
Next: Canto LXXXIII.: The Journey Begun.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXXIII.: THE JOURNEY BEGUN.
Then Bharat rose at early morn,
And in his noble chariot borneDrove forward at a rapid paceEager to look on Ráma's face.The priests and lords, a fair array,In sun-bright chariots led the way.Behind, a well appointed throng,Nine thousand elephants streamed along.Then sixty thousand cars, and then,With various arms, came fighting men.A hundred thousand archers showed
In lengthened line the steeds they rode--
A mighty host, the march to graceOf Bharat, pride of Raghu's race.Kaikeyí and Sumitrá came,And good Kaus'alyá, dear to fame:By hopes of Ráma's coming cheeredThey in a radiant car appeared.On fared the noble host to seeRáma and Lakshman, wild with glee,And still each other's ear to please,Of Ráma spoke in words like these:'When shall our happv eyes behold

Our hero true, and pure, and bold,
So lustrous dark, so strong of arm,Who keeps the world from woe and harm?The tears that now our eyeballs dimWill vanish at the sight of him,As the whole world's black shadows flyWhen the bright sun ascends the sky.'   Conversing thus their way pursuedThe city's joyous multitude,And each in mutual rapture pressedA friend or neighbour to his breast.Thus every man of high renown,And every merchant of the town,And leading subjects, joyous wentToward Ráma in his banishment.And those who worked the potter's wheel,And artists skilled in gems to deal;And masters of the weaver's art,And those who shaped the sword and dart;And they who golden trinkets made,And those who plied the fuller's trade;And servants trained the bath to heat,And they who dealt in incense sweet;Physicians in their business skilled.And those who wine and mead distilled;And workmen deft in glass who wrought,And those whose snares the peacock caught;With them who bored the ear for rings,Or sawed, or fashioned ivory things:

And those who knew to mix cement,
Or lived by sale of precious scent;And men who washed, and men who sewed,And thralls who mid the herds abode;And fishers of the flood, and theyWho played and sang, and women gay;And virtuous Bráhmans, Scripture-wise,Of life approved in all men's eyes;These swelled the prince's lengthened train,Borne each in car or bullock wain.Fair were the robes they wore uponTheir limbs where red-hued unguents shone.These all in various modes conveyedTheir journey after Bharat made;The soldiers' hearts with rapture glowed,Following Bharat on his road,Their chief whose tender love would fainBring his dear brother home again.With elephant, and horse, and car,The vast procession travelled far,
p. 192
And came where Gangá's waves belowThe town of Sringavera  
1 flow.
There, with his friends and kinsmen nigh,Dwelt Guha, Ráma's dear ally,Heroic guardian of the landWith dauntless heart and ready hand.

There for a while the mighty force
That followed Bharat stayed its course,Gazing on Gangá's bosom stirredBy many a graceful water-bird.When Bharat viewed his followers there,And Gangá's water, blest and fair,The prince, who lore of words possessed,His councillors and lords addressed:'The captains of the army call:Proclaim this day a halt for all,That so to-morrow, rested, weMay cross this flood that seeks the sea.Meanwhile, descending to the shore,The funeral stream I fain would pourFrom Gangá's fair auspicious tideTo him, my father glorified.'   Thus Bharat spoke: each peer and lordApproved his words with one accord,And bade the weary troops reposeIn separate spots where'er they chose.There by the mighty stream that day,Most glorious in its vast arrayThe prince's wearied army lay   In various groups reclined.There Bharat's hours of night were spent,While every eager thought he bentOn bringing home from banishmentHis brother, great of mind.

Next: Canto LXXXIV.: Guha's Anger.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXXIV.: GUHA'S ANGER.
King Guha saw the host spread o'er
The wide expanse of Gangá's shore,With waving flag and pennon graced,And to his followers spoke in haste:'A mighty army meets my eyes,That rivals Ocean's self in size:Where'er I look my very mindNo limit to the host can find.Sure Bharat with some evil thoughtHis army to our land has brought.See, huge of form, his flag he rears,That like an Ebony-tree appears.He comes with bonds to take and chain,Or triumph o'er our people slain:And after, Ráma will be slay,--Him whom his father drove away:The power complete he longs to gain.And--task too hard--usurp the reign.
So Bharat comes with wicked will
His brother Rama's blood to spill.But Ráma's slave and friend am I;He is my lord and dear ally.Keep here your watch in arms arrayed

Near Gangá's flood to lend him aid,
And let my gathered servants standAnd line with troops the river strand.Here let the river keepers meet.Who flesh and roots and berries eat;A hundred fishers man each boatOf the five hundred here afloat,And let the youthful and the strongAssemble in defensive throng.But yet, if, free from guilty thought'Gainst Ráma, he this land have sought,The prince's happy host to dayAcross the flood shall make its way.'   He spoke: then bearing in a dishA gift of honey, meat, and fish,The king of the Nishadas drewToward Bharat for an interview.When Bharat's noble charioteerObserved the monarch hastening near,He duly, skilled in courteous lore,The tidings to his master bore:'This aged prince who hither bendsHis footsteps with a thousand friends,Knows, firm ally of Ráma, allThat may in Danduk wood befall:Therefore, Kakutstha's son, admitThe monarch, as is right and fit:For doubtless he can clearly tellWhere Ráma now and Lakshman dwell.'

   When Bharat heard Sumantra's rede,
To his fair words the prince agreed:'Go quickly forth,' he cried, 'and bringBefore my face the aged king.'King Guha, with his kinsmen near,Rejoiced the summoning to hear:He nearer drew, bowed low his head,And thus to royal Bharat said:'No mansions can our country boast,And unexpected comes thy host:But what we have I give thee all:Rest in the lodging of thy thrall.See, the Nishadas here have broughtThe fruit and roots their hands have sought:And we have woodland fare beside.And store of meat both fresh and dried.To rest their weary limbs, I prayThis night at least thy host may stay:Then cheered with all we can bestowTo-morrow thou with it mayst go.'
Footnotes
192:1 Now Sungroor, in the Allahabad district.

Next: Canto LXXXV.: Guha And Bharat.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXXV.: GUHA AND BHARAT.
Thus tho Nishadas' king besought:
The prince with spirit wisdom-fraught
p. 193
Replied in seemly words that blentDeep matter with the argument:'Thou, friend of him whom I revere,With honours high hast met me here,For thou alone wouldst entertainAud feed to-day so vast a train."In such fair words the prince replied,Then, pointing to the path he cried:'Which way aright will lead my feetTo Bharadvája's calm retreat;For all this land near Gangá's streamsPathless and hard to traverse seems?'   Thus spoke the prince: King Guha heardDelighted every prudent word,And gazing on that forest wide,Raised suppliant hands, and thus replied:'My servants, all the ground who know,O glorious Prince, with thee shall goWith constant care thy way to guide,

And I will journey by thy side.
But this thy host so wide dispreadWakes in my heart one doubt and dread,Lest, threatening Ráma good and great,Ill thoughts thy journey stimulate."   But wheu King Guha, ill at ease,Declared his fear in words like these,As pure as is the cloudless skyWith soft voice Bharat made reply:'Suspect me not: ne'er come the timeFor me to plot so foul a crime!He is my eldest brother, heIs like a father dear to me.I go to lead my brother thenceWho makes the wood his residence.No thought but this thy heart should frame:This simple truth my lips proclaim.'   Then with glad cheer King Guha cried,With Bharat's answer gratified:'Blessed art thou: on earth I seeNone who may vie, O Prince, with thee,Who canst of thy free will resignThe kingdom which unsought is thine.For this, a name that ne'er shall die,Thy glory through the worlds shall fly,Who fain wouldst balm thy brother's painAnd lead the exile home again.'   As Guha thus, and Bharat, eachTo other spoke in friendly speech,

The Day God sank with glory dead,
And night o'er all the sky was spread.Soon as King Guha's thoughtful careHad quartered all the armv there,Well honoured, Bharat laid his headBeside S'atrughna on a bed.But grief for Ráma yet oppressedHigh-minded Bharat's faithful breast--Such torment little was deservedBy him who ne'er from duty swerved.The fever raged through every veinAnd burnt him with its inward pain:So when in woods the flames leap free
The fire within consumes the tree.
From heat of burning anguish sprungThe sweat upon his body hung,As when the sun with fervid glowOn high Himalaya melts the snow.As, banished from the herd, a bullWanders alone and sorrowful.   Thus sighing and distressed,In misery and bitter grief,With fevered heart that mocked relief,Distracted in his mind, the chief   Still mourned and found no rest.
Next: Canto LXXXVI.: Guha's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXXVI.: GUHA'S SPEECH.
Guha the king, acquainted well
With all that in the wood befell,To Bharat the unequalled toldThe tale of Lakshman mighty-souled:'With many an earnest word I spakeTo Lakshman as he stayed awake,And with his bow and shaft in handTo guard his brother kept his stand:'Now sleep a little, Lakshman, seeThis pleasant bed is strewn for thee:Hereon thy weary bodv lay,And strengthen thee with rest, I pray,Inured to toil are men like these,But thou hast aye been nursed in ease.Rest, duteous-minded! I will keepMy watch while Ráma lies asleep:For in the whole wide world is noneDearer to me than Raghu's son.Harbour no doubt or jealous fear:I speak the truth with heart sincere:For from the grace which he has shownWill glory on my name be thrown:Great store of merit shall I gain,And duteous, form no wish in vain.

Let me enforced by many a row
Of followers, armed with shaft and bowFor well-loved Ráma's weal provideWho lies asleep by Sitá's side.For through this wood I often go,And all its shades conceal I know:And we with conquering arms can meetA four-fold host arrayed complete.'With words like these I spoke, designedTo move the high-souled Bharat's mind,But he upon his duty bent,Plied his persuasive argument:'O, how can slumber close mine eyesWhen lowly couched with Sitá liesThe royal Ráma? can I giveMy heart to joy, or even live?He whom no mighty demon, no,Nor heavenly God can overthrow,See, Guha, how he lies, alas,
p. 194
With Sítá couched on gathered grass.By varied labours, long, severe,By many a prayer and rite austere,He, Das'aratha's cherished son,By Fortune stamped, from Heaven was won.Now as his son is forced to fly,The king ere long will surely die:

Reft of his guardian hand, forlorn
In widowed grief this land will mourn,E'en now perhaps, with toil o'erspent,The women cease their loud lament,And cries of woe no longer ringThroughout the palace of the king.But ah for sad Kaus'alyá! howFare she and mine own mothef now?How fares the king? this night, I think,Some of the three in death will sink.With hopes upon S'atrughna setMy mother may survive as yet,But the sad queen will die who boreThe hero, for her grief is sore.His cherished wish that would have madeDear Ráma king, so long delayed,'Too late! too late!' the king will cry,And conquered by his misery die.When Fate has brought the mournful dayWhich sees my father pass away,How happy in their lives are theyAllowed his funeral rites to pay.Our exile o'er, with him who ne'erTurns from the oath his lips may swear,May we returning safe and wellAgain in fair Ayodhyá dwell.'Thus Bharat stood with many a sighLamenting, and the night went by.Soon as the morning light shone fair

In votive coils both bound their hair.
And then I sent them safely o'erAnd left them on the farther shore.With Sítá then they onward passed,Their coats of bark about them cast,   Their locks like hermits' bound,The mighty tamers of the foe,Each with his arrows and his bow,Went over the rugged ground,Proud in their strength and undeterredLike elephants that lead the herd,And gazing oft around.
Next: Canto LXXXVII.: Guha's Story.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXXVII.: GUHA'S STORY.
That speech of Guha Bharat heard
With grief and tender pity stirred,And as his ears the story drank,Deep in his thoughtful heart it sank.His large full eyes in anguish rolled,His trembling limbs grew stiff and cold;Then fell he, like a tree upturn,In woe too grievous to be borne.When Guha saw the long-armed chiefWhose eye was like a lotus leaf,With lion shoulders strong and fair,High-mettled, prostrate in despair,--Pale, bitterly afflicted, heReeled as in earthquake reels a tree.But when S'atrughna standing nighSaw his dear brother helpless lie,Distraught with woe his head he bowed,Embraced him oft and wept aloud.Then Bharat's mothers came, forlornOf their dear king, with fasting worn,And stood with weeping eyes aroundThe hero prostrate on the ground.Kaus'alyá, by her woe oppressed,The senseless Bharat's limbs caressed

As a fond cow in love and fear
Caresses oft her youngling dear:Then yielding to her woe she said,Weeping and sore disquieted:'What torments, O my son, are theseOf sudden pain or swift disease?The lives of us and all the lineDepend, dear child, on only thine.Ráma and Lakshman forced to flee,I live by naught but seeing thee:For as the king has past awayThou art my only help to-day.Hast thou, perchance, heard evil newsOf Lakshman, which thy soul subdues,Or Ráma dwelling with his spouse--My all is he--neath forest boughs?'   Then slowly gathering sense and strengthThe weeping hero rose at length,And words like these to Guha spake,That bade Kaus'alyá comfort take:'Where lodged the prince that night? and whereLakshman the brave, and Sítá fair?Show me the couch whereon he lay,Tell me the food he ate, I pray.'   Then Guha the Nishádas' kingReplied to Bharat's questioning:'Of all I had I brought the bestTo serve my good and honoured guestFood of each varied kind I chose,

And every fairest fruit that grows.
Ráma the hero truly braveDeclined the gift I humbly gave:His Warrior part he ne'er forgot,And what I brought accepted not:'No gifts, my friend, may we accept:Our law is, Give, and must be kept."'The high-souled chief, O Monarch, thusWith gracious words persuaded us.Then calm and still, absorbed in thought,He drank the water Lakshman brought,And then, obedient to his vows,He fasted with his gentle spouse.So Lakshman too from food abstained,
p. 195
And sipped the water that remained:Then with ruled lips, devoutly staid,The three  
1 their evening worship paid.
Then Lakshman with unwearied careBrought heaps of sacred grass, and thereWith his own hands he quickly spread,For Ráma's rest, a pleasant bed,And faithful Sitá's too, where theyReclining each by other lay.Then Lakshman bathed their feet, and drewA little distance from the two.Here stands the tree which lent them shade,

Here is the grass beneath it laid,
Where Ráma and his consort spentThe night together ere they went.Lakshman, whose arms the foeman quell,Watched all the night as sentinel,   And kept his great bow strung:His hand was gloved, his arm waa braced,Two well-filled quivers at his waist,   With deadly arrows, hung.I took my shafts and trusty bow,And with that tamer of the foe   Stood ever wakeful near,And with my followers, bow in hand,Behind me ranged, a ready band,   Kept watch o'er Indra's peer.'
Next: Canto LXXXVIII.: The Ingudí Tree.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXXVIII.: THE INGUDÍ TREE.
When Bharat with each friend and peer
Had heard that tale so full and clear,They went together to the treeThe bed which Ráma pressed to see.Then Bharat to his mothers said:'Behold the high-souled hero's bed:These tumbled heaps of grass betrayWhere he that night with Sitá lay:Unmeet, the heir of fortune highThus on the cold bare earth should lie,The monarch's son, in counsel sage,Of old imperial lineage.That lion-lord whose noble bedWith finest skins of deer was spread,--How can he now endure to pressThe bare earth, cold and comfortless!This sudden fall from bliss to griefAppears untrue, beyond belief:My senses are distraught: I seemTo view the fancies of a dream.There is no deity so great,No power in heaven can master Fate,If Ráma, Das'aratha's heir,Lay on the ground and slumbered there;

And lovely Sitá, she who springs
From fair Videha's ancient kings,
Ráma's dear wife, by all adored,
Lay on the earth beside her lord.Here was his couch, upon this heapHe tossed and turned in restless sleep:On the hard soil each manly limbHas stamped the grass with signs of him,That night, it seems, fair Sitá spentArrayed in every ornament,For here and there my eyes beholdSmall particles of glistering gold.She laid her outer garment here,For still some silken threads appear,How dear in her devoted eyesMust be the bed where Ráma lies,Where she so tender could reposeAnd by his side forget her woes.Alas, unhappy, guilty me!For whom the prince was forced to flee,And chief of Raghu's sons and best,A bed like this with Sitá pressed.Son of a royal sire whose handRuled paramount o'er every land,Could he who every joy bestows,Whose body like the lotus shows,The friend of all, who charms the sight,Whose flashing eyes are darkly bright.

Leave the dear kingdom, his by right,
Unmeet for woe, the heir of bliss,And lie upon a bed like this?Great joy and happy fate are thine,O Lakshman, marked with each fair sign,Whose faithful footsteps follow stillThy brother in his hour of ill.And blest is Sitá, nobly good,Who dwells with Ráma in the wood.Ours is, alas, a doubtful fateOf Ráma reft and desolate.My royal sire has gained the skies,In woods the high-souled hero lies;The state is wrecked and tempest-tossed,A vessel with her rudder lost.Yet none in secret thought has plannedWith hostile might to seize the land:Though forced in distant wilds to dwell,The hero's arm protects it well.Unguarded, with deserted wall,No elephant or steed in stall,My father's royal city showsHer portals open to her foes,Of bold protectors reft and bare,Defenceless in her dark despair:But still her foes the wish restrain,As men from poisoned cates refrain.I from this hour my nights will passCouched on the earth or gathered grass,

Eat only fruit and roots, and wear
A coat of bark, and matted hair.I in the woods will pass, content,For him the term of banishment;So shall I still unbroken saveThe promise which the hero gave.
p. 196
While I remain for Ráma there,S'atrnghna will my exile share,And Ráma in his home again,With Lakshman, o'er Ayodhyá reign,for him, to rule and guard the state,The twice-born men shall consecrate.O, may the Gods I serve inclineTo grant this earnest wish of mine!If when I bow before his feetAnd with all moving arts entreat,   He still deny my prayer,Then with my brother will I live:He must, he must permission give,   Roaming in forests there.'
Footnotes

195:1 Ráma, Lakshman, and Sumantra.
Next: Canto LXXXIX.: The Passage of Gangá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXXIX.: THE PASSAGE OF 
GANGÁ.
That night the son of Raghu lay
On Gangá's bank till break of day:Then with the earliest light he wokeAnd thus to brave S'atrughna spoke.'Rise up, S'atrughna, from thy bed:Why sleepest thou the night is fled.See how the sun who chases nightWakes every lotus with his light.Arise, arise, and first of allThe lord of S'ringavera call,For he his friendly aid will lendOur army o'er the flood to send.'   Thus urged, S'atrughna answered: 'I,Remembering Ráma, sleepless lie.'As thus the brothers, each to each,The lion-mettled, ended speech,Came Guha, the Nishádas' king,And spoke with kindly questioning:'Hast thou in comfort passed,' he cried,'The night upon the river side?With thee how fares it? and are these,Thy soldiers, health and at ease?'

Thus the Nishádas' lord inquired
In gentle words which love inspired,And Bharat, Ráma's faithful slave,Thus to the king his answer gave:'The night has sweetly passed, and weAre highly honoured, King, by thee.Now let thy servants boats prepare,Our army o'er the stream to bear.'   The speech of Bharat Guha heard,And swift to do his bidding stirred.Within the town the monarch spedAnd to his ready kinsmen said:'Awake, each kinsman, rise, each friend!May every joy your lives attend.Gather each boat upon the shoreAnd ferry all the army o'er.'Thus Guha spoke: nor they delayed,But, rising quick, their lord obeyed,And soon, from every side secured,Five hundred boats were ready moored.Some reared aloft the mystic sign,  
1
And mighty bells were hung in line:Of firmest build, gay flags they bore,And sailors for the helm and oar.One such King Guha chose, whereon,Of fair white cloth, an awning shone,And sweet musicians charmed the ear,--And bade his servants urge it near.Then Bharat swiftly sprang on board,

And then S'atrughna, famous lord,
To whom, with many a royal dame,Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá came.The household priest went first in place,The elders, and the Brahman race,And after them the monarch's trainOf women borne in many a wain,Then high to heaven the shouts of thoseWho fired the army's huts,  
2 arose,
With theirs who bathed along the shore,Or to the boats the baggage bore.Full freighted with that mighty forceThe boats sped swiftly on their coarse,By royal Guha's servants manned,And gentle gales the banners fanned.Some boats a crowd of dames conveyed,In others noble coursers neighed;Some chariots and their cattle bore,Some precious wealth and golden store.Across the stream each boat was rowed,There duly disembarked its load,And then returning on its way,Sped here and there in merry play.Then swimming elephants appearedWith flying pennons high upreared.And as the drivers urged them o'er,The look of winged mountains wore.Some men in barges reached the strand,Others on rafts came safe to land:

Some buoyed with pitchers crossed the tide,
And others on their arms relied.Thus with the help the monarch gaveThe army crossed pure Gangá's wave:Then in auspicious hour it stoodWithin Prayuga's famous wood.The prince with cheering words addressedHis weary mem, and bade them rest   Where'er they chose and he,With priest and deacon by his side,To Bharadvaja's dwelling hied   That best of saints to see.
p. 197
Footnotes
196:1 The svastika, a little cross with a transverse line 
at each extremity.
196:2 When an army marched it was customary to burn the huts in which it had spent the night.
Next: Canto XC.: The Hermitage.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XC.: THE HERMITAGE.
The prince of men a league away
Saw where the hermit's dwelling lay,Then with his lords his path pursued,And left his warrior multitude.On foot, as duty taught his mind,He left his warlike gear behind:Two robes of linen cloth he wore,And bade Vas'ishtha walk before.Then Bharat from his lords withdrewWhen Bharadvája came in view,And toward the holy hermit wentBehind Vas'ishtha, reverent.When Bharadvája, saint austere,Saw good Vis'ishtha drawing near,He cried, upspringing from his seat,'The grace-gift bring, my friend to greet.'When Saint Vas'ishtha near him drew,And Bharat paid the reverence due,The glorious hermit was awareThat Das'aratha's son was there.The grace-gift, water for their feetHe gave, and offered fruit to eat;Then, duty-skilled, with friendly speechIn seemly order questioned each:

'How fares it in Ayodhvá now
With treasury and army? howWith kith and kin and friends most dear,With councillor, and prince, and peer?'But, for be knew the king was dead,Of Das'aratha naught he said.Vas'ishtha and the prince in turnWould of the hermits welfare learn:Of holy fires they fain would hear,Of pupils, trees, and birds, and deer.The glorious saint his answer madeThat all was well in holy shade:Then love of Ráma moved his breast,And thus he questioned of his guest:Why art thou here, O Prince, whose bandWith kingly sway protects the land;Declare the cause, explain the whole.For yet some doubt disturbs my soul.He whom Kaus'alyá bare, whose mightThe foemen slays, his line's delight,He who with wife and brother sentAfar now roam in banishment.Famed prince, to whom his father spakeThis order for a woman's sake:'Away! and in the forest spendThy life till fourteen years shall end'--Has thou the wish to harm him, bentOn sin against the innocent?Wouldst thou thine elder's realm enjoy

Without a thorn that can annoy?'
   With sobbing voice and tearful eyeThus Bharat sadly made reply:'Ah lost am I, if thou, O Saint,
Canst thus in thought my heart attaint:
No warning charge from thee I need;Ne'er could such crime from me proceed.The words my guilty mother spakeWhen fondly jealous for my sake--Think not that I, to triumph moved,Those words approve or e'er approved.O Hermit, I have sought this placeTo win the lordly hero's grace,To throw me at my brother's feetAnd lead him to his royal seat.To this, my journey's aim and end,Thou shouldst, O Saint, thy favour lend:Where is the lord of earth? do thou,Most holy, say, where roams he now?   Then, by the saint Vas'ishtha pressed,     And all the gathered priests beside,   To Bharat's dutiful request     The hermit graciously replied:'Worthy of thee, O Prince, this deed,True son of Raghu's ancient seed.I know thee reverent, well-controlled,The glory of the good of old.I grant thy prayer: in this pursuit

I know thy heart is resolute.
'Tis for thy sake those words I saidThat wider still thy fame may spread.I know where Ráma, duty-tried,His brother, and his wife abide.Where Chitrakúta's heights ariseThy brother Ráma's dwelling lies.Go thither with the morning's light,And stay with all thy lords tonight:For I would show thee honour high,And do not thou my wish deny.'
Next: Canto XCI.: Bharadvája's Feast.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XCI.: BHARADVÁJA'S FEAST.
Soon as he saw the prince's mind
To rest that day was well inclined,He sought Kaikeyí's son to pleaseWith hospitable courtesies.Then Bharat to the saint replied:'Our wants are more than satisfied.The gifts which honoured strangers greet,And water for our weary feetHast thou bestowed with friendly care,And every choice of woodland fare.'   Then Bharadvája spoke, a smilePlaying upon his lips the while:'I know, dear Prince, thy friendly mindWill any fare sufficient find,But gladly would I entertainAnd banquet all thine armed train:Such is my earnest wish: do thouThis longing of my heart allow,Why host thou hither bent thy way,And made thy troops-behind thee stay?
p. 198
Why unattended? couldst thou not

With friends and army seek this spot?'
   Bhharat, with reverent hands raised high,To that great hermit made reply:'My troops, for awe of thee, O Sage,I brought not to thy hermitage:Troops of a king or monarch's sonA hermit's home should ever shun.Behind me comes a mighty trainWide spreading o'er the ample plain,Where every chief and captain leadsMen, elephants, and mettled steedsI feared, O reverend Sage, lest theseMight harm the holy ground and trees,Springs might be marred and cots o'er-thrown,So with the priests I came alone.'   'Bring all thy host,' the hermit cried,And Bharat, to his joy, complied.Then to the chapel went the sire,Where ever burnt the sacred fire,And first, in order due, with sipsOf water purified his lips:To Visvakarmá, then he prayed,His hospitable feast to aid:'Let Vis'vakarmá hear my call,The God who forms and fashions all:A mighty banquet I provide,Be all my wants this day supplied.Lord Indra at their head, the three  
1
Who guard the worlds I call to me:

A mighty host this day I feed,
Be now supplied my every need.Let all the streams that eastward go,And those whose waters westering flow,Both on the earth and in the sky,Flow hither and my wants supply.Be some with ardent liquor filled,And some with wine from flowers distilled,While some their fresh cool streams retainSweet as the juice of sugar-cane,I call the Gods I call the bandOf minstrels that around them stand:I call the Háhá and Huhú,I call the sweet Vis'vásaI call the heavenly wives of theseWith all the bright Apsarases,Alambushe of beauty rare,The charmer of the tangled hair,Ghritáchí And Vis'váchi fair,Hemá and Bhímá sweet to view,And lovely Nágadantá too,And all the sweetest nymphs who standBy Indra or by Brahmá's hand--I summon these with all their trainAnd Tumburu to lead the strain.Here let Kuvera's garden riseWhich far in Northern Kuru  
2 lies:
For leaves let cloth and gems entwine,

And let its fruit be nymphs divine.
Let Soma  1b give the noblest food
To feed the mighty multitude,Of every kind, for tooth and lip,To chew, to lick, to suck, and sip.Let wreaths, where fairest flowers abound,Spring from the trees that bloom around.Each sort of wine to woo the taste,And meats of every kind be placed.'   Thus spake the hermit sulf-restrained,With proper tone by rules ordained,On deepest meditation bent,In holy might predominent.Then as with hands in reverence raisedAbsorbed in thought he eastward gazed,The deities be thus addreasedCame each in semblance manifest.Delicious gales that cooled the frameFrom Malaya and Dardar came,That kissed those scented hills and threwAuspicious fragrance where they blew.Then falling fast in sweetest showersCame from the sky immortal flowers,And all the airy region roundWith heavenly drums was made to sound.Then breathed a soft celestial breeze,Then danced the bright Apsarases,The minstrels and the Gods advanced,And warbling lutes the soul entranced.

The earth and sky that music filled,
And through each ear it softly thrilled,As from the heavenly quills it fellWith time and tune attempered well.Soon as the minstrels ceased to playAnd airs celestial died away.The troops of Bharat saw amazedWhat Vis'vakarmá's art had raised.On every side, five leagues around,All smooth and level lay the ground,With fresh green grass that charmed the sightLike sapphires blent with lazulite.There the Wood-apple hung the head,The Mango and the Citron glowedThe Bel and scented Jak were there,And Amlá with fruitage fair.There, brought from Northern Kuru, stoodRich in delights, the glorious wood,And many a stream was seen to glide
p. 199
With flowering trees along its side.There mansions rose with four wide halls,And elephants and chargers' stalls,And many a house of royal state,Triumphal are and bannered gate.With noble doorways, sought the sky,Like a pale cloud, a palace high,

Which far and wide rare fragrance shed,
With wreaths of white engarlanded.Square was its shape, its halls were wide,With many a seat and couch supplied,Drink of all kinds, and every meatSuch as celestial Gods might eat.Then at the bidding of the seerKaikeyi''s strong-armed son drew near.And passed within that fair abodeWhich with the noblest jewels glowed.Then, as Vas'ishtha led the way,The councillors, in due array.Followed delighted and amazedAnd on the glorious structure gazed.Then Bharat, Raghu's son, drew nearThe kingly throne, with prince and peer,Whereby the chouri in the shadeOf the white canopy was laid.Before the throne he humbly bentAnd honoured Ráma, reverent,Then in his hand the chouri bore,And sat where sits a councillor,His ministers and household priestSat by degrees from chief to least,Then sat the captain of the hostAnd all the men he honoured most.Then when the saint his order gave,Each river with enchanted waveRolled milk and curds divinely sweet

Before the princely Bharat's feet;
And dwellings fair on either side,With gay white plaster beautified.Their heavenly roofs were seen to lift,The Bra'hman Bharady'aja's gift,Then straight by Lord Kuvera sent,Gay with celestial ornamentOf bright attire and jewels' shine.Came twenty thousand nymphs divine:The man on whom those beauties glancedThat moment felt his soul entranced.With them from Nandan's blissful shadesCame twenty thousand heavenly maids.Tumburu, Na'rad, Gopa came,And Sutanu, like radiant flame.The kings of the Gandharva throng,And ravished Bharat with their song.Then spoke the saint, and swift obeyedAlambusb'a, the fairest maid,And Mis'rakes'i bright to view,Ramana, Pundarik'a too,And danced to him with graceful easeThe dances of Apsarases.All deplete that by Gods are worn,Or Chaitraratha's graves adorn,
Bloomed by the saint's command arrayed
On branches in Praya'ga's shade.When at the saint's command the breeze

Made music with the Vilva trees,
To wave in rhythmic beat beganThe boughs of each Myrobolan,And holy fig-trees wore the lookOf dancers, as their leaflets shook.The fair Tama'la, palm, and pine,With trees that tower and plants that twine,The sweetly varying forms displayedOf stately dame or bending maid.Here men the foaming winecup quaffed,Here drank of milk full many a draught,And tasted meats of every kind,Well dressed, whatever pleased their mind.Then beauteous women, seven or eight,Stood ready by each man to wait:Beside the stream his limbs they strippedAnd in the cooling water dipped.And then the fair ones, sparkling eyed,With soft hands rubbed his limbs and dried.And sitting on the lovely bankHeld up the winecup as he drank.Nor did the grooms forget to feedCamel and mule and ox and steed,For there were stores of roasted grain,Of honey and of sugar-cane.So fast the wild excitement spreadAmong the warriors Bharat led,That all the mighty army throughThe groom no more his charger knew,

And he who drove might seek in vain
To tell his elephant again.With every joy and rapture fired,Entranced with all the heart desired,The myriads of the host that nightRevelled delirious with delight.Urged by the damsels at their sideIn wild delight the warriors cried:'Ne'er will we seek Ayodhya', no,Nor yet to Dandak forest go:Here will we stay: may happy fateOn Bharat and on Ráma wait'Thus cried the army gay and freeExulting in their lawless glee,Both infantry and those who rodeOn elephants, or steeds bestrode,Ten thousand voices shouting, 'ThisIs heaven indeed for perfect bliss.'With garlands decked they idly strayed,And danced and laughed and sang and played.At length as every soldier eyed,With food like Amrit satisfied.Bach dainty cate and tempting meat,No longer had he care to eat.Thus soldier, servant, dame, and slaveReceived whate'er the wish might crave.As each in new-wrought clothes arrayedEnjoyed the feast before him laid.

p. 200
Each man was seen in white attire
Unstained by spot or speck of mire:None was athirst or hungry there,And none had dust upon his hair.On every side in woody dellsWas milky food in bubbling wells,And there were all-supplying cowsAnd honey dropping from the boughs.Nor wanted lakes of flower-made drinkWith piles of meat upon the brink,boiled, stewed, and roasted, varied cheer,Peachick and jungle-fowl and deer,There was the flesh of kid and boar,And dainty sauce in endless store,With juice of flowers concocted well,And soup that charmed the taste and smell,And pounded fruits of bitter taste,And many a bath was ready placedDown by each river's shelving sideThere stood great basins well supplied,And laid therein, of dazzling sheen,White brushes for the teeth were seen,And many a covered box whereinWas sandal powdered for the skin.And mirrors bright with constant care,And piles of new attire were there,And store of sandals and of shoes,

Thousands of pairs, for all to choose:
Eye-unguents, combs for hair and beard,Umbrellas fair and bows appeared.Lakes gleamed, that lent digestive aid, 
1
And some for pleasant bathing made,With waters fair, and smooth inclineFor camels, horses, mules, and kine.There saw they barley heaped on highThe coutless cattle to supply:The golden grain shone fair and brightAs sapphires or the lazulite.To all the gathered host it seemedAs if that magic scene they dreamed,And wonder, as they gazed, increasedAt Bharadvája's glorious feast.   Thus in the hermit's grove they spentThat night in joy and merriment,Blest as the Gods who take their easeUnder the shade of Nandan's trees.Each minstrel bade the saint adieu,And to his blissful mansion flew,Aiid every stream and heavenly dameKtturned as swiftly as she came.
Footnotes

198:1 Yama, Varuna and Kuvera.
198:2 A happy land in the remote north where the 
inhabitants enjoy a natural pefection attended with 
complete happiness obtained without exertion. There is there no vicissitude, nor decrepitude, nor death, nor fear: no distinction of virtue and vice, none of the inequalities denoted by the words best, worst, and intermediate, nor any change resulting from the succssion of the four Yugas.' Sea MUIR'S. Sanskrit Texts, Vol I, p. 402.
198:1b The Moon.
Next: Canto XCII.: Bharat's Farewell.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XCII.: BHARAT'S FAREWELL.
So Bharat with his army spent
The watches of the night content,
And gladly, with the morning's light
Drew near his host the anchorite.When Bharadvája saw him standWith hand in reverence joined to hand,When fires of worship had been fed,He looked upon the prince and said:'O blameless son, I pray thee tell,Did the past night content thee well?Say if the feast my care suppliedThy host of followers gratified.'   His hands he joined, his head he bentAnd spoke in answer reverentTo the most high and radiant sageWho issued from his hermitage:'Well have I passed the night: thy feastGave joy to every man and beast;And I, great lord, and every peerWere satisfied with sumptuous cheer,Thy banquet has delighted allFrom highest chief to meanest thrall,And rich attire and drink and meat

Banished the thought of toil and heat,
And now, O Hermit good and great,A boon of thee I supplicate.To Ráma's side my steps I bend:Do thou with friendly eye commend.O tell me how to guide my feetTo virtuous Ráma's lone retreat:Great Hermit, I entreat thee, sayHow far from here and which the way.'   Thus by fraternal love inspiredThe chieftain of the saint inquired:Then thus replied the glorious seerOf matchless might, of vows austere:'Ere the fourth league from here be passed,Amid a forest wild and vast,Stands Chitrakúta's mountain tall,Lovely with wood and waterfall.North of the mountain thou wilt seeThe beauteous stream Mandákiní,Where swarm the waterfowl below.And gay trees on the margin grow.Then will a leafy cot betweenThe river and the hill be seen:'Tis Ráma's, and the princely pairOf brothers live for certain there.Hence to the south thine army lead,And then more southward still proceed.So shall thou find his lone retreat,And there the son of Raghu meet.'

   Soon as the ordered march they knew,
The widows of the monarch flew,Leaving their cars, most meet to ride,And flocked to Bharadvája's side.There with the good Sumitrá QueenKaus'alyá, sad and worn, was seen,Caressing, still with sorrow faint,The feet of that illustrious saint,Kaikeyí too, her longings crossed,Reproached of all, her object lost,Before the famous hermit came,
p. 201
And clasped his feet, overwhelmed with shame.With circling steps she humbly wentAround the saint preëminent,And stood not far from Bharat's sideWith heart oppressed, and heavy-eyed.Then the great seer, who never brokeOne holy vow, to Bharat spoke:'Speak, Raghu's son: I fain would learnThe story of each queen in turn.'
Obedient to the high request
By Bharadvája thus addressed,His reverent hands together laid,He, skilled in speech, his answer made:'She whom, O Saint, thou seest here

A Goddess in her form appear,
Was the chief consort of the king,Now worn with fast and sorrowing.As Aditi in days of yoreThe all-preserving Vishnu bore,Kaus'alyá bore with happy fateLord Ráma of the lion's gait.She who, transfixed with torturing pangs,On her left arm so fondly hangs,As when her withering leaves decayDroops by the wood the Cassia spray,Sumitrá, pained with woe, is she,The consort second of the three:Two princely sons the lady bare,Fair as the Gods in heaven are fair.And she, the wicked dame through whomMy brothers' lives are wrapped in gloom,And mourning for his offspring dear,The king has sought his heavenly sphere,--Proud, foolish-hearted, swift to ire,Self-fancied darling of my sire,Kaikeyí, most ambitious queen,Unlovely with her lovely mien,My mother she, whose impious willIs ever bent on deeds of ill,In whom the root and spring I seeOf all this woe which crushes me.'
Quick breathing like a furious snake,

With tears and sobs the hero spake,
With reddened eyes aglow with rage.And Bharadvája, mighty sage,Supreme in wisdom, calm and grave,In words like these good counsel gave:'O Bharat, hear the words I say;On her the fault thou must not lay:For many a blessing yet will springFrom banished Ráma's wandering.'And Bharat, with that promise cheered,Went circling round that saint revered.He humbly bade farewell, and thenGave orders to collect his men.Prompt at the summons thousands flewTo cars which noble coursers drew,Bright-gleaming, glorious to behold,Adorned with wealth of burnished gold.Then female elephants and male,Gold-girthed, with flags that wooed the gale,Marched with their bright bells' tinkling chimeLike clouds when ends the summer time:Some cars were huge and some were light,For heavy draught or rapid flight,Of costly price, of every kind,With clouds of infantry behind.The dames, Kaus'alyá at their head,Were in the noblest chariots led,And every gentle bosom beatWith hope the banished prince to meet.

The royal Bharat, glory-crowned,
With all his retinue around,Borne in a beauteous litter rode,Like the young moon and sun that glowed.The army as it streamed along,Cars, elephants, in endless throng,Showed, marching on its southward way,Like autumn clouds in long array.
Footnotes
200:1 The poet does not tell us what these lakes 
contained.
Next: Canto XCIII.: Chitrakúta In Sight.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XCIII.: CHITRAKÚTA IN SIGHT.
As through the woods its way pursued
That mignty bannered multitude,Wild elephants in terror fledWith all the startled herds they led,And bears and deer were seen on hill,In forest glade, by every rill.Wide as the sea from coast to coast,The high-souled Bharat's mighty hostCovered the earth as cloudy trainsObscure the sky when fall the rains.The stately elephants he led,And countless steeds the land o'erspread,So closely crowded that betweenTheir serried ranks no ground was seen.Then when the host had travelled far,And steeds were worn who drew the car,The glorious Bharat thus addressedVas'ishtha, of his lords the best:'The spot, methinks, we now beholdOf which the holy hermit told,For, as his words described, I traceEach several feature of the place:Before us Chitrakúta shows,Mandákiní beside us flows:

Afar umbrageous woods arise
Like darksome clouds that veil the skies.Now tread these mountain-beasts of mineOn Chitrakúta's fair incline.The trees their rain of blossoms shedOn table-lands beneath them spread,As from black clouds the floods descendWhen the hot days of summer end.S'atrughna, look, the mountain seeWhere heavenly minstrels wander free,
p. 202
And horses browse beneath the steep.Countless as monsters in the deep.Scared by my host the mountain deerStarting with tempest speed appearLike the long lines of cloud that flyIn autumn through the windy sky.See, every warrior shows his headWith fragrant blooms engarlanded;All look like southern soldiers whoLift up their shields of azure hue.This lonely wood beneath the hill.That was so dark and drear and still,Covered with men in endless streamsNow like Ayodhyá's city seems.The dust which countless hoofs exciteObscures the sky and veils the light;

But see, swift winds those clouds dispel
As if they strove to please me well.See, guided in their swift careerBy many a skilful charioteer,Those cars by fleetest coursers drawnRace onward over glade and lawn.Look, startled as the host comes nearThe lovely peacocks fly in fear,Gorgeous as if the fairest bloomsOf earth had glorified their plumes.Look where the sheltering covert showsThe trooping deer, both bucks and does,That occupy in countless herdsThis mountain populous with birds.Most lovely to my mind appearsThis place which every charm endears:Fair as the road where tread the Blest;Here holy hermits take their rest,Then let the army onward pressAnd duly search each green recessFor the two lion-lords, till weRáma once more and Lakshman see.'
Thus Bharat spoke: and hero bands
Of men with weapons in their handsEntered the tangled forest: thenA spire of smoke appeared in ken.Soon as they saw the rising smokeTo Bharat they returned and spoke:

'No fire where men are not: 'tis clear
That Raghu's sons are dwelling here.Or if not here those heros dwellWhose mighty arms their foeman quell,Still other hermits here must beLike Ráma, true and good as he.'
His ears attentive Bharat lent
To their resistless argument,Then to his troops the chief who brokeHis foe's embattled armies spoke:'Here let the troops in silence stay;One step beyond they must not stray.Come Dhrishti and Sumantra, youWith me alone the path pursue.'Their leader's speech the warriors heard,And from his place no soldier stirred,And Bharat beat his eager eyesWhere curling smoke was seen to rise.
The host his order well obeyed,
And halting there in silence stayedWatching where from the thicket's shade   They saw the smoke appear.And joy through all the army ran,'Soon shall we meet,' thought every man,   'The prince we hold so dear.'

Next: Canto XCIV.: Chitrakúta.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XCIV.: CHITRAKÚTA.
There long the son of Raghu dwelt
And love for hill and wood he felt.Then his Videhan spouse to pleaseAnd his own heart of woe to ease,Like some Immortal--Indra soMight Swarga's charms to S'achi show--Drew her sweet eyes to each delightOf Chitrakúta's lovely height:'Though reft of power and kingly sway,Though friends and home are far away,I cannot mourn my altered lot,Enamoured of this charming spot.Look, darling, on this noble hillWhich sweet birds with their music fill.Bright with a thousand metal dyesHis lofty summits cleave the skies.See, there a silvery sheen is spread,And there like blood the rooks are red.There shows a streak of emerald green,And pink and yellow glow between.There where the higher peaks ascend,Crystal and flowers and topaz blend.And others flash their light afarLike mercury or some fair star:

With such a store of metals dyed
The king of hills is glorified.There through the wild birds' populous homeThe harmless bear and tiger roam:Hyaenas range the woody slopesWith herds of deer and antelopes.See, love, the trees that clothe his sideAll lovely in their summer pride,In richest wealth of leaves arrayed,With flower and fruit and light and shade,Look where the young Rose-apple glows;What loaded boughs the Mango shows;See, waving in the western windThe light leaves of the Tamarind,And mark that giant Peepul throughThe feathery clump of tall bamboo.  
1
p. 203
Look, on the level lands above,Delighting in successful loveIn sweet enjoyment many a pairOf heavenly minstrels revels there,While overhanging boughs supportTheir swords and mantles as they sport:Then see that pleasant shelter wherePlay the bright Daughters of the Air. 
1
The mountain seems with bright cascadeAnd sweet rill bursting from the shade,

Like some majestic elephant o'er
Whose burning head the torrents pour.Where breathes the man who would not feelDelicious languor o'er him steal,As the young morning breeze that springsFrom the cool cave with balmy wings,Breathes round him laden with the scentOf bud and blossom dew-besprent?If many autumns here I spentWith thee, my darling innocent;And Lakshman, I should never knowThe torture of the fires of woe,This varied scene so charms my sight,This mount so fills me with delight,Where flowers in wild profusion spring,And ripe fruits glow and sweet birds sing.My beauteous one, a double goodSprings from my dwelling in the wood:Loosed is the bond my sire that tiedAnd Bharat too is gratified.My darling, dost thou feel with meDelight from every charm we see,Of which the mind and every senseFeel the enchanting influence?My fathers who have passed away,The royal saints, were wont to say
That life in woodland shades like this
Secures a king immortal bliss.

See, round the hill at random thrown.
Huge masses lie of rugged stoneOf every shape and many a hue,Yellow and white and red and blue.But all is fairer still by night:Each rock reflects a softer light,When the whole mount from foot to crestIn robes of lambent flame is dressed;When from a million herbs a blazeOf their own luminous glory plays,And clothed in fire each deep ravine,Each pinnacle and crag is seen.Some parts the look of mansions wear,And others are as gardens fair,While others seem a massive blockOf solid undivided rock.Behold those pleasant beds o'erlaidWith lotus leaves, for lovers made,Where mountain birch and *costus throwCool shadows on the pair below.See where the lovers in their playHave cast their flowery wreaths away,And fruit and lotus buds that crownedTheir brows lie trodden on the ground.North Kuru's realm is fair to see,Vasvaukasárá, 
1b Naliní, 2b
But rich in fruit and blossom stillMore fair is Chitrakúta's hill.Here shall the years appointed glide

With thee, my beauty, by my side,
   And Lakshman ever near;Here shall I live in all delight,Make my ancestral fame more bright,Tread in their path who walk aright,   And to my oath adhere.'
Footnotes
202:1 These ten lines are a substitution for, and not a 
translation of the text which Carey and Marshman thus 
render: 'This mountain adorned with mango,(1) jumboo,(2) usuna,(3) lodhra, (4) piala, (5) punusa, (6) dhava, (7) 
p. 203 unkotha, (8) bhuvya,(9) tinisha, (10) vilwa, (11) 
tindooka, (12) bamboo,(13) kashmaree,(14) urista,(l5) vuruna,(16) madhooka,(17) tilaka, (18) vuduree,(l9) amluka,(20) nipa,(21) vetra,(22) dhunwuna,(23) veejaka,(24) and other trees affording flowers, and fruits, and the most delightful shade, how charming does it appear!' 
   1 Mangifera Indica. 2 Eugenia Jambolifera, 3 
Terminalialata tomentosa. 4 This tree is not ascertained. 5 Chironjia Sapida. 6 Artocarpus integrifolia. 7 Grislea tomentosa. 8 Allangium hexapetalum. 9 Averrhoa carimbola. 10 Dalbergia Oujeinensis. 11 Ægle 

marmelos. 12 Diospyrus melanoxylon. 13 Well known. 
14 Gmelina Arborea. 15 Sapindus Saponaria. 16 Cratoeva tapia. l7 Bassia la tifolia. 18 Not yet ascertained. 19 Zizyphus jujuba. 20 Phyllanthus emblica. 21 Nauclea Orientalis. 22 Calamusrotang. 23 Echites antidysenterica. 34 The citron tree.'
203:1 Vidyadharis, Spirits of Air, sylphs.
Next: Canto XCV.: Mandákiní.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XCV.: MANDÁKINÍ.
Then Ráma, like the lotus eyed,
Descended from the mountain side,And to the Maithil lady showedThe lovely stream that softly flowed.And thus Ayodhyá's lord addressedHis bride, of dames the loveliest,Child of Videha's king, her faceBright with the fair moon's tender grace:'How sweetly glides, O darling, look,Mandákiní's delightful brook,Adorned with islets, blossoms gay,And s'arases and swans at play!
p. 204
The trees with which her banks are linedShow flowers and fruit of every kind:The match in radiant sheen is sheOf King Kuvera's Nalini.  
1
My heart exults with pleasure newThe shelving hand and ford to view,Where gathering herds of thirsty deerDisturb the wave that ran so clear.Now look, those holy hermits mark

In skins of deer and coats of bark;
With twisted coils of matted hair,The reverend men are bathing there,And as they lift their arms on highThe Lord of Day they glorify:These best of saints, my large-eyed spouse,Are constant to their sacred vows.The mountain dances while the treesBend their proud summits to the breeze,And scatter many a flower and budFrom branches that o'erhang the flood.There flows the stream like lucid pearl,Round islets here the currents whirl,And perfect saints from middle airAre flocking to the waters there.See, there lie flowers in many a heapFrom boughs the whistling breezes sweep,And others wafted by the galeDown the swift current dance and sail.Now see that pair of wild-fowl rise,Exulting with their joyful cries:Hark, darling, wafted from afarHow soft their pleasant voices are.To gaze on Churakuta's hill,To look upon this lovely rill,To bend mine eyes on thee, dear wife,Is sweeter than my city life.Come, bathe we in the pleasant rillWhose dancing waves are never still,

Stirred by those beings pure from sin,
The sanctities who bathe therein:Come, dearest, to the stream descend,Approach her as a darling friend,And dip thee in the silver floodWhich lotuses and lilies stud.Let this fair hill Ayodhya seem,Its silvan things her people deem,And let these waters as they flowOur own beloved Sarju show.How blest, mine own dear love, am I;Thou, fond and true, art ever nigh,And duteous, faithful Lakshman staysBeside me, and my word obeys.Here every day I bathe me thrice,Fruit, honey, roots for food suffice,And ne'er my thoughts with longing strayTo distant home or royal sway.For who this charming brook can seeWhere herds of roedeer wander free,
And on the flowery-wooded brink
Apes, elephants, and lions drink,   Nor feel all sorrow fly?'Thus eloquently spoke the prideOf Raghu's children to his bride,And wandered happy by her sideWhere Chitrakuta azure-dyed   Uprears his peaks on high.

Footnotes
203:1b A lake attached either to Amaravati the 
residence of Indra, or Alaká that of Kuvera.
203:2b The Ganges of heaven.
204:1 Nalini, as here, may be the name of any lake covered with lotuses.
Next: Canto XCVI. : The Magic Shaft.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XCVI.  1b: THE MAGIC SHAFT.
Thus Rama showed to Janak's child
The varied beauties of the wild,The hill, the brook and each fair spot,Then turned to seek their leafy cot.North of the mountain Rama foundA cavern in the sloping ground,Charming to view, its floor was strownWith many a mass of ore and stone,In secret shadow far retiredWhere gay birds sang with joy inspired,And trees their graceful branches swayedWith loads of blossom downward weighed.Soon as he saw the cave which tookEach living heart and chained the look,Thus Rama spoke to Sita, whoGazed wondering on the silvan view:'Does this fair cave beneath the height,Videhan lady, charm thy sight?Then let us resting here a whileThe languor of the way beguile.That block of stone so smooth and squareWas set for thee to rest on there,And like a thriving Kes'ar treeThis flowery shrub o'ershadows thee.'

Thus Rama spoke, and Janak's child,
By nature ever soft and mild,In tender words which love betrayedHer answer to the hero made:'O pride of Raghu's children, stillMy pleasure is to do thy will.Enough for me thy wish to know:Far hast thou wandered to and fro.'   Thus Sita spake in gentle tone,And went obedient to the stone,Of perfect face and faultless limbPrepared to rest a while with him.And Rama, as she thus replied,Turned to his spouse again and cried:'Thou seest, love, this flowery shadeFor silvan creatures' pleasure made,How the gum streams from trees and plantsTorn by the tusks of elephants!
p. 205
Through all the forest clear and highResounds the shrill cicala's cry.Hark how the kite above us moans,And calls her young in piteous tones;So may my hapless mother beStill mourning in her home for me.There mounted on that lofty SálThe loud Bhringráj  
1 repeats his call:

How sweetly now he tunes his throat
Responsive to the Koïl's note.Or else the bird that now has sungMay be himself the Koïl's young,Linked with such winning sweetness areThe notes he pours irregular.See, round the blooming Mango clingsThat creeper with her tender rings,So in thy love, when none is near,Thine arms are thrown round me, my dear.'  Thus in his joy he cried; and she,Sweet speaker, on her lover's knee,Of faultless limb and perfect face,Grew closer to her lord's embrace.Reclining in her husband's arms,A goddess in her wealth of charms,She filled his loving breast anewWith mighty joy that thrilled him through.His finger on the rock he laid,Which veins of sanguine ore displayed,And painted o'er his darling's eyesThe holy sign in mineral dyes.Bright on her brow the metal layLike the young sun's first gleaming ray,And showed her in her beauty fairAs the soft light of morning's air.Then from the Kes'ar's laden treeHe picked fair blossoms in his glee,And as he decked each lovely tress,

His heart o'erflowed with happiness.
So resting on that rocky seatA while they spent in pastime sweet,Then onward neath the shady boughsWent Ráma with his Maithil spouse.She roaming in the forest shadeWhere every kind of creature strayedObserved a monkey wandering near,And clung to Ráma's arm in fear.The hero Ráma fondly lacedHis mighty arms around her waist,Consoled his beauty in her dread,And scared the Monkey till he fled.That holy mark of sanguine oreThat gleamed on Sítá's brow before,Shone by that close embrace impressedUpon the hero's ample chest.Then Sítá, when the beast who ledThe monkey troop, afar had fled,Laughed loudly in light-hearted gleeThat mark on Ráma's chest to see.
A clump of bright As'okas fired
The forest in their bloom attired:The restless blossoms as they gleamedA host of threatening monkeys seemed.Then Sítá thus to Ráma cried,As longingly the flowers she eyed:'Pride of thy race, now let us go

Where those As'oka blossoms grow.'
He on his darling's pleasure bentWith his fair goddess thither wentAnd roamed delighted through the woodWhere blossoming As'okas stood,As S'iva with Queen Umá rovesThrough Himaván's majestic groves.Bright with purpureal glow the pairOf happy lovers sported there,And each upon the other setA flower-inwoven coronet.There many a crown and chain they woveOf blooms from that As'oka grove,And in their graceful sport the twoFresh beauty o'er the mountain threw.The lover let his love surveyEach pleasant spot that round them lay,Then turned they to their green retreatWhere all was garnished, gay, and neat.By brotherly affection led,Sumitrá's son to meet them sped,And showed the labours of the dayDone while his brother was away.There lay ten black-deer duly slainWith arrows pure of poison stain,Piled in a mighty heap to dry,With many another carcass nigh.And Lakshman's brother saw, o'erjoyed,The work that had his hands employed,

Then to his consort thus he cried:
'Now be the general gifts supplied.'Then Sítá, fairest beauty, placedThe food for living things to taste,And set before the brothers meatAnd honey that the pair might eat.They ate the meal her hands supplied,Their lips with water purified:Then Janak's daughter sat at lastAnd duly made her own repast.The other venison, to be dried,Piled up in heaps was set aside,And Ráma told his wife to stayAnd drive the flocking crows away.Her husband saw her much distressedBy one more bold than all the rest,Whose wings where'er he chose could fly,Now pierce the earth, now roam the sky.Then Ráma laughed to see her stirredTo anger by the plaguing bird:Proud of his love the beauteous dameWith burning rage was all aflame.Now here, now there, again, againShe chased the crow, but all in vain,Enraging her, so quick to strike
p. 206
With beak and wing find claw alike:

Then how the proud lip quivered, how
The dark frown marked her angry brow!When Ráma saw her cheek aglowWith passion, he rebuked the crow.But bold in impudence the bird,With no respect for Ráma's word,Fearless again at Sítá flew:Then Ráma's wrath to fury grew.The hero of the mighty armSpoke o'er a shaft the mystic charm,Laid the dire weapon on his bowAnd launched it at the shameless crow.The bird, empowered by Gods to springThrough earth itself on rapid wing,Through the three worlds in terror fledStill followed by that arrow dread.Where'er he flew, now here now there,A cloud of weapons filled the air.Back to the high-souled prince he fledAnd bent at Ráma's feet his head,And then, as Sítá looked, beganHis speech in accents of a man:'O pardon, and for pity's sakeSpare, Ráma, spare my life to take!Where'er I turn, where'er I flee,No shelter from this shaft I see.'
The chieftain heard the crow entreat
Helpless and prostrate at his feet,

And while soft pity moved his breast,
With wisest speech the bird addressed:'I took the troubled Sítá's part,And furious anger filled my heart.Then on the string my arrow layCharmed with a spell thy life to slay.Thou seekest now my feet, to craveForgiveness and thy life to save.So shall thy prayer have due respect:The suppliant I must still protect.But ne'er in vain this dart may flee;Yield for thy life a part of thee,What portion of thy body, say,Shall this mine arrow rend away?Thus far, O bird, thus far aloneOn thee my pity may be shown.Forfeit a part thy life to buy:'Tis better so to live than die.'Thus Ráma spoke: the bird of airPondered his speech with anxious care,And wisely deemed it good to giveOne of his eyes that he might live.To Raghu's son he made reply:'O Ráma, I will yield an eye.So let me in thy grace confideAnd live hereafter single-eyed.'Then Ráma charged the shaft, and lo,Full in the eye it smote the crow.And the Videhan lady gazed

Upon the ruined eye amazed.
The crow to Ráma humbly bent,Then where his fancy led he went.Ráma with Lakshman by his sideWith needful work was occupied.
Footnotes
204:1b This canto is allowed, by Indian commentators, 
to be an interpolation. It cannot be the work of Valmiki.
205:1 A fine bird with a strong, sweet note, and great imitative powers.
Next: Canto XCVII.: Lakshman's Anger.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XCVII.: LAKSHMAN'S ANGER.
Thus Ráma showed his love the rill
Whose waters ran beneath the hill,Then resting on his mountain seatRefreshed her with the choicest meat.So there reposed the happy two:Then Bharat's army nearer drew:Rose to the skies a dusty cloud,The sound of trampling feet was loud.The swelling roar of marching menDrove the roused tiger from his den,And scared amain the serpent raceFlying to hole and hiding-place.The herds of deer in terror fled,The air was filled with birds o'erhead,The bear began to leave his tree,The monkey to the cave to flee.Wild elephants were all amazedAs though the wood around them blazed.The lion oped his ponderous jaw,The buffalo looked round in awe.The prince, who heard the deafening sound.And saw the silvan creatures roundFly wildly startled from their rest,The glorious Lakshman thus addressed:

'Sumitrá's noble son most dear,
Hark, Lakshman, what a roar I hear,The tumult of a coming crowd.Appalling, deafening, deep, and loud!The din that yet more fearful growsScares elephants and buffaloes,Or frightened by the lions, deerAre flying through the wood in fear.I fain would know who seeks this place:Comes prince or monarch for the chase?Or does some mighty beast of preyFrighten the silvan herds away?Tis hard to reach this mountain height,Yea, e'en for birds in airy flight.Then fain, O Lakshman, would I knowWhat cause disturbs the forest so.'
Lakshman in haste, the wood to view.
Climbed a high Sál that near him grew,The forest all around he eyed,First gazing on the eastern side.Then northward when his eyes he bentHe saw a mighty armamentOf elephants, and cars, and horse,And men on foot, a mingled force,And banners waving in the breeze,And spoke to Ráma words like these:'Quick, quick, my lord, put out the fire,Let Sítá to the cave retire.

p. 207
Thy coat of mail around thee throw,
Prepare thine arrows and thy bow.'
In eager haste thus Lakshman cried,
And Ráma, lion lord, replied:'Still closer be the army scanned,And say who leads the warlike band.'Lakshman his answer thus returned,As furious rage within him burned,Exciting him like kindled fireTo scorch the army in his ire:'Tis Bharat: be has made the throneBy consecrating rites his own:To gain the whole dominion thusHe comes in arms to slaughter us.I mark tree-high upon his carHis flagstaff of the Kovídár,  
1
I see his glittering banner glance,I see his chivalry advance:I see his eager warriors shineOn elephants in lengthened line.Now grasp we each the shafts and bow,And higher up the mountain go.Or in this place, O hero, standWith weapons in each ready hand.Perhaps beneath our might may fall

This leader of the standard tall,
And Bharat I this day may seeWho brought this mighty woe on thee,Sítá, and me, who drove awayMy brother from the royal sway.Bharat our foe at length is nigh,And by this hand shall surely die:Brother, I see no sin at allIf Bharat by my weapon fall.No fault is his who slays the foeWhose hand was first to strike the blow:With Bharat now the crime beginsWho against thee and duty sins.The queen athirst for royal swayWill see her darling son to-dayFall by this hand, like some fair treeStruck by an elephant, slain by me.Kaikeyí's self shall perish tooWith kith and kin and retinue,And earth by my avenging deedShall from this mass of sin be freed.This day my wrath, too long restrained,Shall fall upon the foe, unchained,Mad as the kindled flame that speedsDestroying through the grass and reeds.This day mine arrows keen and fierceThe bodies of the foe shall pierce;The woods on Chitrakúta's sideShall run with torrents crimson-dyed.

The wandering beasts of prey shall feed
On heart-cleft elephant and steed,And drag to mountain caves awayThe bodies that my arrows slay.Doubt not that Bharat and his train
Shall in this mighty wood be slain:
So shall I pay the debt my bowAnd these my deadly arrows owe.
Footnotes
207:1 Bauhinea variegata, a species of ebony.
Next: Canto XCVIII: Lakshman Calmed.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XCVIII: LAKSHMAN CALMED.
Then Ráma nobly calm allayed
The wrath that Lakshman's bosom swayed:'What need have we the sword to wield,To bend the bow or lift the shield,If Bharat brave, and wise, and good,Himself has sought this sheltering wood?I sware my father's will to do,And if I now my brother slewWhat gain in kingship should I find,Despised and scorned by all mankind?Believe me, e'en as I would shrinkFrom poisoned meat or deadly drink,No power or treasure would I winBy fall of friend or kith or kin.Brother, believe the words I speak:For your dear sakes alone I seekDuty and pleasure, wealth and gain:A holy life, a happy reign.If royal sway my heart desires,My brothers' weal the wish inspires:Their bliss and safety is my care,By this uplifted bow I swear.'Twere not so hard for me to gainThis broad land girdled by the main,

But even Indra's royal might
Should ne'er be mine in duty's spite,If any bliss my soul can seeDeprived of dear S'atrughna, thee,And Bharat, may the flame destroyWith ashy gloom the selfish joy.Far dearer than this life of mine,Knowing the custom of our line,His heart with fond affection fraught,Bharat Ayodhyá's town resought,And hearing when he came that I,With thee and Sítá, forced to flyWith matted hair and hermit dressAm wandering in the wilderness.While grief his troubled senses storms,And tender love his bosom warms,From every thought of evil clear,Is come to meet his brother here.Some grievous words perchance he spokeKaikeyí's anger to provoke,Then won the king, and comes to layBefore my feet the royal sway.Hither, methinks, in season dueComes Bharat for an interview,Nor in his secret heart has heOne evil thought 'gainst thee or me.What has he done ere now, reflect!How failed in love or due respect

p. 208
To make thee doubt his faith and lay
This evil to his charge to-day?Thou shouldst not join with Bharat's nameSo harsh a speech and idle blame.The blows thy tongue at Bharat deals,My sympathizing bosom feels.How, urged by stress of any ill,Should sons their father's life-blood spill,Or brother slay in impious strifeA brother dearer than his life?If thou these cruel words hast saidBy strong desire of empire led,My brother Bharat will I prayTo give to thee the kingly sway.'Give him the realm', my speech shall be,And Bharat will, methinks, agree.'   Thus spoke the prince whose chief delightWas duty, and to aid the right:And Lakshman keenly felt the blame,And shrank within himself for shame:And then his answer thus returned,With downcast eye and cheek that burned:'Brother, I weep, to see thy faceOur sire himself has sought this place.'Thus Lakshman spoke and stood ashamed,And Rama saw and thus exclaimed:'It is the strong-armed monarch: he

Is come, methinks, his sons to see,
To bid us both the forest quitFor joys for which he deems us fit:He thinks on all our care and pain,And now would lead us home again.My glorious father hence will bearSita who claims all tender care.I see two coursers fleet as storms,Of noble breed and lovely forms.I see the beast of mountain sizeWho bears the king our father wise,The aged Victor, march this wayIn front of all the armed array.But doubt and fear within me rise,For when I look with eager eyesI see no white umbrella spread,World-famous, o'er the royal head.Now, Lakshman, from the tree descend,And to my words attention lend.   Thus spoke the pious prince: and heDescended from the lofty tree,And reverent hand to hand applied,Stood humbly by his brother's side.   The host, compelled by Bharat's care,The wood from trampling feet to spare,Dense crowding half a league each wayEncamped around the mountain lay.Below the tall hill's shelving sideGleamed the bright army far and wide

   Spread o'er the ample space,
By Bharat led who firmly trueIn duty from his bosom threwAll pride, and near his brother drewTo win the hero's grace.
Next: Canto XCIX.: Bharat's Approach.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XCIX.: BHARAT'S APPROACH.
Soon as the warriors took their rest
Obeying Bharat's high behest,Thus Bharat to Satrughna spake:'A band of soldiers with thee take,And with these hunters o'er and o'erThe thickets of the wood explore.With bow, sword, arrows in their handsLet Guba with his kindred bandsWithin this grove remaining traceThe children of Kakutstha's race.And I meanwhile on foot will throughThis neighbouring wood my way pursue,With elders and the twice-born men,And every lord and citizen.There is, I feel, no rest for meTill Rama's face again I see,Lakshman, in arms and glory great,And Sita born to happy fate:No rest, until his cheek as brightAs the fair moon rejoice my sight,No rest until I see the eyeWith which the lotus petals vie;Till on my head those dear feet restWith signs of royal rank impressed;

None, till my kingly brother gain
His old hereditary reign,Till o'er his limbs and noble headThe consecrating drops be shed.How blest is Janak's daughter, trueTo every wifely duty, whoCleaves faithful to her husband's sideWhose realm is girt by Ocean's tide!This mountain too above the restE'en as the King of Hills is blest,--Whose shades Kakutstha's scion holdAs Nandan charms the Lord of Gold.Yea, happy is this tangled groveWhere savage beasts unnumbered rove,Where, glory of the Warrior race,King Rama finds a dwelling-place.'   Thus Bharat, strong-armed hero spake,And walked within the pathless brake.O'er plains where gay trees bloomed he went,Through boughs in tangled net-work bent,And then from Rama's cot appearedThe banner which the flame upreared.And Bharat joyed with every friendTo mark those smokv wreaths ascend:'Here Rama dwells,' he thought; 'at lastThe ocean of our toil is passed.'   Then sure that Rama's hermit cot     Was on the mountain's side   He stayed his army on the spot,

     And on with Guha hied.
p. 209
Next: Canto C.: The Meeting.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO C.: THE MEETING.
'Then Bharat to Satrughna showed
The spot, and eager onward strode,First bidding Saint Vasishtha bringThe widowed consorts of the king,As by fraternal love impelledHis onward course the hero held,Sumantra followed close behindSatrughra with an anxious mind:Not Bharat's self more fain could beTo look on Rama's face than he.As, speeding on, the spot he neared,Amid the hermits' homes appearedHis brother's cot with leaves o'erspread,And by its side a lowly shed.Before the shed great heaps were leftOf gathered flowers and billets cleft,And on the trees hung grass and barkRama and Lakshman's path to mark:And heaps of fuel to provideAgainst the cold stood ready dried.The long-armed chief, as on he wentIn glory's light preeminent,With joyous words like these addressedThe brave Satrughna and the rest:

'This is the place, I little doubt,
Which Bharadvája pointed out,Not far from where we stand must beThe woodland stream, Mandákini.Here on the mountain's woody sideRoam elephants in tusked pride,And ever with a roar and cryEach other, as they meet, defy.And see those smoke-wreaths thick and dark:The presence of the flame they mark,Which hermits in the forest striveBy every art to keep alive.O happy me! my task is done,And I shall look on Raghu's son,Like some great saint, who loves to treatHis elders with all reverence meet.'Thus Bharat reached that forest rill,Thus roamed on Chitrakuta's hill;Then pity in his breast awoke,And to his friends the hero spoke:'Woe, woe upon my life and birth!The prince of men, the lord of earthHas sought the lonely wood to dwellSequestered in a hermit's cell.Through me, through me these sorrows fallOn him the splendid lord of all:Through me resigning earthly blissHe hides him in a home like this.Now will I, by the world abhorred,

Fall at the dear feet of my lord,
And at fair Sitft's too, to winHis pardon for my heinous sin.'
   As thus he sadly mourned and sighed,
The son of Dasaratha spiedA bower of leafy branches made,Sacred and lovely in the shade,Of fair proportions large and tall,Well roofed with boughs of palm, and Sál,Arranged in order due o'erheadLike grass upor an altar spread.Two glorious bows were gleaming there,Like Indra's 
1 in the rainy air,
Terror of foemen. backed with gold,Meet for the mightiest hand to hold:And quivered arrows cast a blazeBright gleaming like the Day-God's rays:Thus serpents with their eyes aglowAdorn their capital below. 
2
Great swords adorned the cottage, laidEach in a case of gold brocade;There hung the trusty shields, whereon.With purest gold the bosses shone.The brace to bind the bowman's arm,The glove to shield his hand from harm,A lustre to the cottage lentFrom many a golden ornament:Safe was the cot from fear of men

As from wild beasts the lion's den.
The fire upon the altar burned,That to the north and east was turned.Bharat his eager glances bentAnd gazed within the cot intent;In deerskin dress, with matted hair,Rama his chief was sitting there:With liou-shl ulders broad and strong,With lotus eyes, arms thick and long.The righteous sovereign, who should beLord paramount from sea to sea,High-minded, born to lofty fate,Like Brahma's self supremely great;With Lakshman by his side, and her,Fair Sita, for his minister.And Bharat gazing, overcomeBy sorrow for a while was dumb,Then, yielding to his woe, he ranTo Kama and with sobs began:'He who a royal seat should fillWith subjects round to do his will,My elder brother,--see him here,With silvan creatures waiting near.The high-souled hero, wont to wearThe costliest robes exceeding fair,Now banished, in a deerskin dress,Here keeps the path of righteousness.How brooks the son of Eaghu nowThe matted locks which load his brow,

Around whose princely head were twined
Sweet blossoms of the rarest kind?The prince whose merits grew, acquired
p. 210
By rites performed as he desired,Would now a store of merit gainBought by his body's toil and pain.Those limbs to which pure sandal lentThe freshness of its fragrant scent,Exposed to sun. and dust, and rain,Are now defiled with many a stain.And I the wretched cause why thisFalls on the prince whose right is bliss!Ah me, that ever I was bornTo be the people's hate and scorn!'   Thus Bharat cried: of anguish sprung,Great drops upon his forehead hung.He fell o'erpowered-his grief was such-Ere he is brother's feet could touch.As on the glorious prince he gazedIn vain his broken voice he raised:'Dear lord'--through tears and sobbing came,The only words his lips could frame.And brave Satrughna wept aloud,As low at Ráma's feet he bowed.Then Ráma, while his tears ran fast,His arms around his brothers cast.

Guha, Sumantra came to meet
The princes in their wild retreat.   Vrihaspati and Sukra bright     Their greeting thus rejoice to pay   To the dear Lord who brings the night,     And the great God who rules the day.   Then wept the dwellers of the shade,     Whose eyes the princes, meet to ride   On mighty elephants, surveyed;     And cast all thought of joy aside.
Footnotes
209:1 The rainbow is called the bow of Indra.
209:2 Bhogavatí, the abode of the Nagas or Serpent race.
Next: Canto CI.: Bharat Questioned.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CI.: BHARAT QUESTIONED.
Then Rama gazed, and scarcely knew
Bharat so worn and changed in hue.He raised him, kissed him on the head,Embraced him, and thus kindly said;'Where was thy father, brother dear,That thou art come to seek me here?Unmeet, if he be living yet,Thy feet within the wood to set.I pray thee now the cause declareWhy thou hast left the kingdom there,With matted locks and deerskin dressTo roam the distant wilderness.'
Thus questioned by the prince, at length
Kaikeyi's son regained his strength,And hand to hand in reverence laid,To Rama thus his answer made:'The great-armed monarch, O my lard,Has dared to do a thing abhorred,Left us, and grieving for his son,A home among the Gods has won.
My mother Queen Kaikeyf gave

The order to the king her slave,
And at the bidding of the dameHe wrought the sin which mars his fame.Athirst for sway, her hopes are crossed,She mourns her son, her husband lost,And through her impious crime will goFor punishment to hell below.Now O my lord, forgive me all;Be gracious to thy lowly thrall:Anointed king, accept to-dayLike Iudra's self, the royal sway.Be gracious, Prince, to lord and peer,And widowed queens who seek thee hereAccept the kingdom thine by right.And so thy faithful friends delight.Let the broad land no longer beAll widowed and forlorn of thee:Let the full moon of autumn reignTriumphant o'er the night again.These lords and I before thee bend:O Rama, to Our prayer attend.O do not thou this grace deny:Thy brother, pupil, slave am I.Look on this venerable ring,Advisers of our sire the king.From age to age so honoured: thouShouldst grant their supplication now?   As weeping thus the hero prayed,His head at Rama's feet he laid.

Like a mad elephant he sighed:
And Rama, gazed and thus replied:'How, brother, Can a man of worth,True to his vows, of noble birth-A man like me, commit a sinThe lordship of the land to win?No slightest shade of fault I see,O tamer of thy foes, in thee.But ne'er shouldst thou in childish thoughtThe queen thy mother blame in aught,O brother wise and sinless, knowThe sacred laws would have it so,That from good wife and son requireObedience to their lord and sire.And we are all the king's, for thusThe virtuous ever reckon us:Yea brother, be it known to thee,His wives, and sons, and pupils we.His is the right, if he deem fit,To bid me, throned as monarch, sit,Or in a coat of bark expel,And deerskin, in the wood to dwell.And O remember, best of allWho act as claims of duty call,As to a virtuous sire is due,Such honour claims a mother too.So they whose lives have ever beenBy duty led, the king and queen,Said,'Rama, seek the forest shade:'

And I (what could I else?) obeyed.
Thou must the royal power retain,
p. 211
And o'er the famed Ayodhyá reign:I dressed in bark my days will spentWhere Dandak'a forest wilds extend.So Das'aratha spoke, our king,His share to each apportioningBefore his honoured servants, eyes:Then, heir of bliss, he sought the skies.The righteous monarch's honoured will,Whom all revered, must guide thee still,And thou must still enjoy the shareAssigned thee by our father's care.So I till twice seven years are spentWill roam this wood in banishment,Contented with the lot which he,My high-souled sire, has given me.The charge the monarch gave, endearedTo all mankind, by all revered,   Peer of the Lord Supreme,Far better, richer far in gainOf every blessing than to reign   O'er all the worlds I deem.'
Next: Canto CII.: Bharat's Tidings.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CII.: BHARAT'S TIDINGS.
He spoke: and Bharat thus replied;
'If, false to every claim beside,I ne'er in kingly duties fail,What will my royal life avail?Still should the custom be observed,From which our line has never swerved,Which to the younger son ne'er givesThe kingdom while the elder lives.Now to Ayodhya rich and fairWith me, O Raghu's son, repair,And to protect and gladden allOur house, thyself as king install,A king the world's opinion deemsA man: to me a God he seems,Whose life in virtuous thoughts and deedsThe lives of other men exceeds.When I in distant Kekaya stayed,And thou hadst sought the forest shade,Our father died, the saints' delight,So constant in each holy rite.Scarce with thy wife and Lakshman thouHadst journeyed forth to keep the vow,When mourning for his son, forspent,To heavenly rest the monarch went,

Then up, O lord of men, away!
His funeral rites of water pay:I and S'atrughna, ere we came,Neglected not the sacred claim.But in the spirit-world, they say,That gift alone is fresh for ayeWhich best beloved hands have poured;And thou his dearest art, my lord.For thee he longed, for thee he grieved,   His every thought on thee was bent,And crushed by woe, of thee bereaved,   He thought of thee as hence he went.'
Next: Canto CIII.: The Funeral Libation.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CIII.: THE FUNERAL LIBATION.
When Rama heard from Bharat each
Dark sorrow of his mournful speech,And tidings of his father dead,His spirits fell, his senses fled.For the sad words his brother spokeStruck on him like a thunder stroke.Fierce as the bolt which Indra throws,The victor of his Daitya foes.Raising his arms in anguish, he,As when the woodman hews a treeWith its fair flowery branches crowned,Fainted and fell upon the ground.Lord of the earth to earth he sank.Helpless, as when a towering bankWith sudden ruin buries deepAn elephant who lay asleep.Then swift his wife and brothers flew,And water, weeping, o'er him threw.As slowly sense and strength he gained,Fast from his eyes the tears he rained,And then in accents sad and weakKakutstha's son began to speak,And mourning for the monarch dead,With righteous words to Bharat said:

'What calls me home, when he, alas,
Has gone the way which all must pass?Of him, the best of kings bereftWhat guardian has Ayodhya left?How may I please his spirit? howDelight the high-souled monarch now,Who wept for me and went aboveBy me ungraced with mourning love!Ah, happy brothers! you have paidDue offerings to his parting shade.E'en when my banishment is o'er,Back to my home I go no more,To look upon the widowed stateReft of her king, disconsolate.E'en then, O tamer of the foe,If to Ayodhya's town I go.Who will direct me as of old,Now other worlds our father hold?From whom, my brother, shall I hearThose words which ever charmed mine earAnd filled my bosom with delightWhene'er he saw me act aright?'   Thus Rama spoke: then nearer cameAnd looking on his moonbright dame,'Sit'a, the king is gone,' he said:   'And Lakshman, know thy sire is dead,
p. 212

And with the Gods on high enrolled:
This mournful news has Bharat told.'He spoke: the noble youths with sighsRained down the torrents from their eyes.And then the brothers of the chiefWith words of comfort soothed his grief:'Now to the king our sire who swayedThe earth be due libations paid.'Soon as the monarch's fate she knew,Sharp pangs of grief smote Sita through:Nor could she look upon her lordWith eyes from which the torrents poured.And Rama strove with tender careTo soothe the weeping dame's despair,And then, with piercing woe distressed,The mournful Lakshman thus addressed:'Brother, I pray thee bring for meThe pressed fruit of the Ingudi,And a bark mantle fresh and new,That I may pay this offering due.First of the three shall Sita go,Next thou, and I the last: for soMoves the funereal pomp of woe.' 
1
   Sumantra of the noble mind,Gentle and modest, meek and kind,Who, follower of each princely youth,To Rama clung with constant truth,Now with the royal brothers' aidThe grief of Rama soothed and stayed,

And lent his arm his lord to guide
Down to the river's holy side.Tnat lovely stream the heroes found,With woods that ever blossomed crowned,And there in bitter sorrow bentTheir footsteps down the fair descent.Then where the stream that swiftly flowedA pure pellucid shallow showed,The funeral drops they duly shed,And 'Father, this be thine,' they said.But he, the lord who ruled the land,Filled from the stream his hollowed hand,And turning to the southern sideStretched out his arm and weeping cried:'This sacred water clear and pure,An offering which shall aye endureTo thee, O lord of kings, I give:Accept it where the spirits live!'   Then, when the solemn rite was o'er,Came Rama to the river shore,And offered, with his brothers' aid,Fresh tribute to his father's shade.
With jujube fruit he mixed the seed
Of Ingudis from moisture freed,And placed it on a spot o'erspreadWith sacred grass, and weeping said:'Enjoy, great King, the cake which weThy children eat and offer thee!

For ne'er do blessed Gods refuse
To share the food which mortals use.'   Then Rama turned him to retraceThe path that brought him to the place,And up the mountain's pleasant sideWhere lovely lawns lay fair, he hied.Soon as his cottage door he gained.His brothers to his breast he strained.From them and Sit'a in their woesSo loud the cry of weeping rose,That like the roar of lions roundThe mountain rolled the echoing sound.And Bharat's army shook with fearThe weeping of the chiefs to hear.'Bharat,' the soldiers cried, ''tis plain,His brother Rama meets again,And with these cries that round us ringThey sorrow for their sire the king.'Then leaving car and wain behind,One eager thought in every mind,Swift toward the weeping, every man,As each could find a passage, ran.Some thither bent their eager courseWith car, and elephant, and horse,And youthful captains on their feetWith longing sped their lord to meet,As though the new-come prince had beenAn exile for long years unseen.Earth beaten in their frantic zeal

By clattering hoof and rumbling wheel,
Sent forth a deafening noise as loudAs heaven when black with many a cloud,Then, with their consorts gathered near,Wild elephants in sudden fearRushed to a distant wood, and shedAn odour round them as they fled.And every silvan thing that dweltWithin those shades the terror felt,Deer, lion, tiger, boar and roe,Bison, wild-cow, and buffalo.And when the tumult wild they heard.With trembling pinions flew each bird,From tree, from thicket, and from lake,Swan, koil, curlew, crane, and drake.With men the ground was overspread,With startled birds the sky o'erhead.Then on his sacrificial groundThe sinless, glorious chief was found.Loading with curses deep and loudThe hump-back and the queen, the crowd.Whose checks were wet, whose eyes were dim,In fond affection ran to him.While the big tears their eyes bedewed,He looked upon the multitude,
p. 213
And then as sire and mother do,

His arms about his loved ones threw.
   Some to his feet with reverence pressed,     Some in his arms he strained:   Each friend, with kindly words addressed,     Due share of honour gained.   Then, by their mighty woe o'ercome,     The weeping heroes' cry   Filled, like the roar of many a drum,     Hill, cavern, earth, and sky.
Footnotes
212:1 'The order of the procession on these occasions is 
that the children precede according to age, then the 
women and after that the men according to age, the youngest first and the eldest last: when they descend into the water this is reversed and resumed when they come out of it.' 
               CAREY AND MAKSHMAN.
Next: Canto CIV.: The Meeting With The Queens.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CIV.: THE MEETING WITH THE 
QUEENS.
Vas'ishtha with his soul athirst
To look again on Rama, firstIn line the royal widows placed,And then the way behind them traced.The ladies moving, faint and slow,Saw the fair stream before them flow,And by the bank their steps were ledWhich the two brothers visited.Kausalya with her faded cheekArid weeping eyes began to speak,And thus in mournful tones addressedThe queen Sumitra and the rest:'See in the wood the bank's descent,Which the two orphan youths frequent,Whose noble spirits never fall,Though woes surround them, reft of all.Thy son with love that never tiresDraws water hence which mine requires,This day, for lowly toil unfit.His pious task thy son should quit.'   As on the long-eyed lady strayed,On holy grass, whose points were laid

Directed to the southern sky,
When Rama's humble gift she spiedThus to the queens Kausalya cried:'The gift of Rama's hand behold,His tribute to the king high-souled,Offered to him, as texts require,Lord of Ikshhvaku's line, his sire!Not such I deem the funeral foodOf kings with godlike might endued.Can he who knew all pleasuies, heWho ruled the earth from sea to sea,The mighty lord of monarchs, feedOn Ingudi's extracted seed?In all the world there cannot beA woe, I ween, more sad to see,Than that my glorious son should makeHis funeral gilt of such a cake.The ancient text I oft have heardThis day is true in every word:'Ne'er do the blessed Gods refuseTo eat the food their children use.'   The ladies soothed the weeping dame:
To Rama's hermitage they came,
And there the hero met their eyesLike a God fallen from the skies.Him joyless, reft of all, they viewed,And tears their mournful eyes bedewed.The truthful hero left his seat,

And clasped the ladies' lotus feet,
And they with soft hands brushed awayThe dust that on his shoulders lay.Then Lakshman, when he saw each queenWith weeping eyes and troubled mien,Near to the royal ladies drewAnd paid them gentle reverence too.He, Das'aratha's offspring, signedThe heir of bliss by Fortune kind,Received from every dame no lessEach mark of love and tenderness.And Sita came and bent beforeThe widows, while her eyes ran o'er,And pressed their feet with many a tear.They when they saw the lady dearPale, worn with dwelling in the wild.Embraced her as a darling child:Daughter of royal Janak, brideOf Das'aratha's son, they cried,'How couldst thou, offering of a king,Endure this woe and sufferingIn the wild forest? When I traceEach sign of trouble on thy face-That lotus which the sun has dried,That lily by the tempest tried,That gold whereon the dust is spread,That moon whence all the light is fled--Sorrow assails my heart, alas!As fire consumes the wood and grass.'

   Then Rama, as she spoke distressed,
The feet of Saint Vas'ishtha pressed,   Touched them with reverential love,     Then near him took his seat:   Thus Indra clasps in realms above     The Heavenly Teacher's  
1 feet.
   Then with each counsellor and peer,     Bharat of duteous mind,   With citizens and captains near,     Sat humbly down behind.   When with his hands to him upraised,     In devotee's attire.   Bharat upon his brother gazed     Whose glory shone like fire,   As when the pure Maheridra bends     To the great Lord of Life,   Among his noble crowd of friends     This anxious thought was rife:   'What words to Raghu's son to-day     Will royal Bharat speak,   Whose heart has been so prompt to pay     Obeisance fond and meek?'   Then steadfast Rama, Lakshman wise,     Bharat for truth renowned,
p. 214
Shone like three fires that heavenward rise   With holy priests around.

Footnotes
213:1 Vrihaspati, the preceptor of the Gods.
Next: Canto CV.: Rama's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CV.: RAMA'S SPEECH.
A while they sat, each lip compressed,
Then Bharat thus his chief addressed:'My mother here was made content;To me was given the government.This now, my lord, I yield to thee:Enjoy it, from all trouble free.Like a great bridge the floods have rent,Impetuous in their wild descent,All other hands but thine in vainWould strive the burthen to maintain.In vain the ass with steeds would vie,With Tárkshya,  
1 birds that wing the sky;
So, lord of men, my power is slightTo rival thine imperial might.Great joys his happy days attendOn whom the hopes of men depend,But wretched is the life he leadsWho still the aid of others needs.And if the seed a man has sown,With care and kindly nurture grown,Rear its huge trunk and spring in timeToo bulky for a dwarf to climb,Yet, with perpetual blossom gay,No fruit upon its boughs display,

Ne'er can that tree, thus nursed in vain,
Approval of the virtuous gain.The simile is meant to beApplied, O mighty-armed, to thee,Because, our lord and leader, thouProtectest not thy people now.O, be the longing wish fulfilledOf every chief of house and guild,To see again their sun-bright lordVictorious to his realm restored!As thou returnest through the crowdLet roars of elephants be loud.And each fair woman lift her voiceAnd in her new-found king rejoice.'  The people all with longing moved,The words that Bharat spoke approved,And crowding near to Ráma pressedThe hero with the same request.The steadfast Ráma, when he viewedHis glorious brother's mournful mood,With each ambitious thought controlled,Thus the lamenting prince consoled:'I cannot do the things I will,For Ráma is but mortal still.Fate with supreme, resistless lawThis way and that its slave will draw,All gathered heaps must waste away,All lofty lore and powers decay.

Death is the end of life, and all,
Now firmly joined, apart must fall.One fear the ripened fruit must know,To fall upon the earth below;So every man who draws his breathMust fear inevitable death.The pillared mansion, high, compact,Must fall by Time's strong hand attacked;So mortal men, the gradual preyOf old and ruthless death, decay.The night that flies no more returns:Yamuná for the Ocean yearns:Swift her impetuous waters flee,But roll not backward from the sea.The days and nights pass swiftly byAnd steal our moments as they fly.E'en as the sun's unpitying raysDrink up the floods in summer blaze.Then for thyself lament and leaveFor death of other men to grieve,For if thou go or if thou stay.Thy life is shorter day by day.Death travels with us; death attendsOur steps until our journey ends.Death, when the traveller wins the goal,Returns with the returning soul.The flowing hair grown* white and thin,And wrinkles mark the altered skin.The ills of age man's strength assail:

Ah, what can mortal power avail?
Men joy to see the sun arise,They watch him set with joyful eyes:But ne'er reflect, too blind to see,How fast their own brief moments flee.With lovely change for ever newThe seasons' sweet return they view,Nor think with heedless hearts the whileThat lives decay as seasons smile.As haply on the boundless mainMeet drifting logs and part again.So wives and children, friends and gold,Oures for a little time we hold:Soon by resistless laws of fateTo meet no more we separate.In all this changing world not oneThe common lot of all can shun:Then why with useless tears deploreThe dead whom tears can bring no more?As one might stand upon the wayAnd to a troop of travellers say:'If ye allow it, sirs, I tooWill travel on the road with you:'So why should mortal man lamentWhen on that path his feet are bentWhich all men living needs must tread,Where sire and ancestors have led?Life flies as torrents downward fallSpeeding away without recall,

So virtue should our thoughts engage,
For bliss  1b is mortals' heritage,
p. 215
By ceaseless care and earnest zealFor servants and for people's weal,By gifts, by duty nobly done,Our glorious sire the skies has won.Our lord the king, o'er earth who reigned,A blissful home in heaven has gainedBy wealth in ample largess spent,And many a rite magnificent:With constant joy from first to lastA long and noble life he passed,Praised by the good, no tears should dimOur eyes, O brother dear, for him.His human body, worn and triedBy length of days, he cast aside,And gained the godlike bliss to strayIn Brahma's heavenly home for aye."For such the wise as we are, deepIn Veda lore, should never weep.Those who are firm and ever wiseSpurn vain lament and idle sighs.Be self-possessed: thy grief restrain:Go, in that city dwell again.Return, O best of men, and beObedient to our sire's decree,

While I with every care fulfil
Our holy father's righteous will,Observing in the lonely woodHis charge approved by all the good,'
   Thus Ráma of the lofty mind
     To Bharat spoke his righteous speech,   By every argument designed     Obedience to his sire to teach,
Footnotes
214:1 Garud, the king of birds.
214:1b To be won by virtue.
Next: Canto CVI.: Bharat's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CVI.: BHARAT'S SPEECH.
Good Bharat, by the river side,
To virtuous Ráma's speech replied,And thus with varied lore addressedThe prince, while nobles round him pressed:'In all this world whom e'er can weFind equal, scourge of foes, to thee?No ill upon thy bosom weighs.No thoughts of joy thy spirit raise.Approved art thou of sages old,To whom thy doubts are ever told.Alike in death and life, to theeThe same to be and not to be.The man who such a soul can gainCan ne'er be crushed by woe or pain.Pure as the Gods, high-minded, wise,Concealed from thee no secret lies.Such glorious gifts are all thine own,And birth and death to thee are known,That ill can ne'er thy soul depressWith all-subduing bitterness.O let my prayer, dear brother, winThy pardon for my mother's sin.Wrought for my sake who willed it notWhen absent in a distant spot.

Duty alone with binding chains
The vengeancs due to crime restrains,Or on the sinner I should liftMy hand in retribution swift.Can I who know the right, and springFrom Das'aratha, purest king--Can I commit a heinous crime,Abhorred by all through endless time?The aged king I dare not blame,Who died so rich in holy fame,My honoured sire, my parted lord,E'en as a present God adored.Yet who in lore of duty skilledSo foul a crime has ever willed,And dared defy both gain and rightTo gratify a woman's spite?When death draws near, so people say,The sense af creatures dies away;And he has proved the ancient sawBy acting thus in spite of law.But O my honoured lord, be kind.Dismiss the trespass from thy mind,The sin the king committed, ledBy haste, his consort's wrath, and dread.For he who veils his sire's offenceWith tender care and reverence--His sons approved by all shall live:Not so their fate who ne'er forgive.

Be thou, my lord, the noble son,
And the vile deed my sire has done,Abhorred by all the virtuous, ne'erResent, lest thou the guilt too share.Preserve us, for on thee we call.Our sire, Kaikeyi, me and allThy citizens, thy kith and kin;Preserve us and reverse the sin.To live in woods a devoteeCan scarce with royal tasks agree,Nor can the hermit's matted hairSuit fitly with a ruler's care.Do not, my brother, do not stillPursue this life that suits thee ill.Mid duties, of a king we countHis consecration paramount,That he with ready heart and handMay keep his people and his land.What Warrior born to royal swayFrom certain good would turn away,A doubtful duty to pursue,That mocks him with the distant view?Thou wouldst to duty cleave, and gainThe meed that follows toil and pain.In thy great task no labour spare:Rule the four castes with justest care.Mid all the four, the wise preferThe order of the householder: 
1

p. 216
Canst thou, whose thoughts to duty cleave,
The best of all the orders leave?My better thou in lore divine,My birth, my sense must yield to thine:While thou, my lord, art here to reign,How shall my hands the rule maintain?O faithful lover of the right,Take with thy friends the royal might,Let thy sires' realm, from trouble free,Obey her rightful king in thee.Here let the priests and lords of stateOur monatch duly consecrate,With prayer and holy verses blessedBy saint Vas'ishtha and the rest.Anointed king by us, againSeek fair Ayodhvá there to reign,And like imperial Indra girtBy Gods of Storm, thy might assert.From the three debts 
1 acquittance earn,
And with thy wrath the wicked burn,O'er all of us thy rule extend,And cheer with boons each faithful friend.Let thine enthronement, lord, this dayMake all thy lovers glad and gay,And let all those who hate thee fleeTo the ten winds for fear of thee.Dear lord, my mother's words of hate

With thy sweet virtues expiate,
And from the stain of folly clearThe father whom we both revere.Brother, to me compassion show,I pray thee with my head bent low,And to these friends who on thee call,--As the Great Father pities all.But if my tears and prayers be vain,And thou in woods wilt still remain,I will with thee my path pursueAnd make my home in forests too.'   Thus Bharat strove to bend his will   With suppliant head, but he,Earth's lord, inexorable still   Would keep his sire's decree.The firmness of the noble chief   The wondering people moved,And rapture mingling with their grief,   All wept and all approved.'How firm his steadfast will,' they cried,  'Who Keeps his promise thus!Ah, to Ayodhyá's town,' they sighed,  'He comes not back with us'The holy priest, the swains who tilled  The earth, the sons of trade,And e'en the mournful queens were filled  With joy as Bharat prayed,And bent their heads, then weeping stilled  A while, his prayer to aid.

Footnotes
215:1 The four religious orders, referable to different 
times of life are, that of the student, that of the 
householder, that of the anchourite, and that of the mendicant.
216:1 To Gods, Men, and Manes.
Next: Canto CVII.: Ráma's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CVII.: RÁMA'S SPEECH.
Thus, by his friends encompassed round,
He spoke, and Ráma, far renowned,To his dear brother thus replied,Whom holy rites had purified:'O thou whom Queen Kaikeyi bareThe best of kings, thy words are fair.Our royal father, when of yoreHe wed her, to her father sworeThe best of kingdoms to confer,A noble dowry meet for her;Then, grateful, on the deadly dayOf heavenly Gods' and demons' fray,A future boon on her bestowedTo whose sweet care his life he owed.She to his mind that promise brought,And then the best of kings besoughtTo bid me to the forest flee,And give the rule, O Prince, to thee.Thus bound by oath, the king our lordGave her those boons of free accord.And bade me, O thou chief of men,Live in the woods four years and ten.I to this lonely wood have hiedWith faithful Lakshman by my side,

And Si*tá by no tears deterred,
Resolved to keep my father's word.And thou, my noble brother, tooShouldst keep our father's promise true:Anointed ruler of the stateMaintain his word inviolate.From his great debt, dear brother, freeOur lord the king for love of me,Thy mother's breast with joy inspire,And from all woe preserve thy sire.*Tis said, near Gayá's holy town  
1b
Gayá, great *saint of high renown,This text recited when he paidDue rites to each ancestral shade:
  'A son is born his sire to free
    From Put's infernal pains:  Hence, saviour of his father, he    The name of Puttra gains.'  
2b
Thus numerous sons are sought by prayer,In Scripture trained with graces fair,
p. 217
That of the number one some dayMay funeral rites at Gayá pay.The mighty saints who lived of oldThis holy doctrine ever hold.

Then, best of men, our sire release
From pains of hell, and give him peace.Now Bharat, to Ayodhya* speed,The brave S'atrughna with thee lead.Take with thee all the twice-born men,And please each lord and citizen.I now, O King, without delayTo Dandak* wood will bend my way,And Lakshman and the Maithil dameWill follow still, our path the same.   Now, Bharat, lord of men be thou,     And o'er Ayodhyá reign:   The silvan world to me shall bow,     King of the wild domain.   Yea, let thy joyful steps be bent     To that fair town to-day,   And I as happy and content,     To Dandak wood will stray.   The white umbrella o'er thy brow     Its cooling shade shall throw:   I to the shadow of the bough     And leafy trees will go.   S'atrughna, for wise plans renowned,     Shall still on thee attend;   And Lakshman, ever faithful found,     Be my familiar friend.   Let us his sons, O brother dear,     The path of right pursue,   And keep the king we all revere

     Still to his promise true.'
Footnotes
216:1b Gayá is a very holy city in Behar. Every good 
Hindu ought once in his life to make funeral offerings 
in Gayá in honour of his ancestors.
216:2b Put is the name of that region of hell to which 
men are doomed who leave no son to perform the 
funeral rites which are necessary to ensure the happiness of the departed. Putra, the common word for a son is said by the highest authority to be derived from Put and tra deliverer.
Next: Canto CVIII.: Jáváli's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CVIII.: JÁVÁLI'S SPEECH.
Thus Ráma soothed his brother's grief:
Then virtuous Jáváli, chiefOf twice-born sages, thus repliedIn words that virtue's law defied:'Hail, Raghu's princely son, dismissA thought so weak and vain as this.Canst thou, with lofty heart endowed,Think with the dull ignoble crowd?For what are ties of kindred? canOne profit by a brother man?Alone the babe first opes his eyes,And all alone at last he dies.The man, I ween, has little senseWho looks with foolish reverenceOn father's or on mother's name:In others, none a right may claim.E'en as a man may leave his homeAnd to a distant village roam,Then from his lodging turn awayAnd journey on the following day,Such brief possession mortals holdIn sire and mother, house and gold,And never will the good and wiseThe brief uncertain lodging prize.

Nor, best of men, shouldst thou disown
Thy sire's hereditary throne,And tread the rough and stony groundWhere hardship, danger, woes abound.Come, let Ayodhyá rich and brightSee thee enthroned with every rite:Her tresses bound in single braid  
1
She waits thy coming long delayed.O come, thou royal Prince, and shareThe kingly joys that wait thee there,And live in bliss transcending priceAs Indra lives in Paradise.The parted king is naught to thee,Nor right in living man has he:The king is one; thou, Prince of men,Another art: be counselled then.Thy royal sire, O chief, has spedOn the long path we all must tread.The common lot of all is this,And thou in vain art robbed of bliss.For those--and only those--I weepWho to the path of duty keep;For here they suffer ceaseless woe,And dying to destruction go.With pious care, each solemn day,Will men their funeral offerings pay:See, how the useful food they waste:He who is dead no more can taste.If one is fed, his strength renewed

Whene'er his biother takes his food,
Then offerings to the parted pay;Scarce will they serve him on his way.By crafty knaves these rites were framed,And to enforce men's gifts proclaimed;'Give, worship, lead a life austere,Keep lustral rites, quit pleasures here.'There is no future life: be wise,And do, O Prince, as I advise.Enjoy, my lord, thy present bliss,And things unseen from thought dismiss.Let this advice thy bosom move,The counsel sage which all approve;To Bharat's earnest prayer incline,And take the rule so justly thine.'
Next: Canto CIX.: The Praises of Truth.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CIX.: THE PRAISES OF TRUTH.
By sage Jáváli thus addressed,
Ráma of truthful hearts the best,
p. 218
With perfect skill and wisdom highThus to his speech made fit reply:'Thy words that tempt to bliss are fair.But virtue's garb they falsely wear.For he from duty's path who straysTo wander in forbidden ways,Allured by doctrine false and vain,Praise from the good can never gain.Their lives the true and boaster show,Pure and impure, and high and low.Else were no mark to judge betweenStainless and stained and high and mean;They to whose lot fair signs may fallWere but as they who lack them all,And those to virtuous thouguts inclinedWere but as men of evil mind.If in the sacred name of rightI do this wrong in duty's spite;The path of virtue meanly quit,

And this polluting sin commit,
What man who marks the bounds betweenVirtue and vice with insight keen,Would rank me high in after time.Stained with this soul destroying crime?Whither could I, the sinner, turn,How hope a seat in heaven to earn,If I my plighted promise break,And thus the righteous path forsake?This world of ours is ever ledTo walk the ways which others tread,And as their princes they behold,The subjects too their lives will mould.That truth and mercy still must beBeloved of kings, is Heaven's decree.Upheld by truth the monarch reigns,And truth the very world sustains.Truth evermore has been the loveOf holy saints and Gods above,And he whose lips are truthful hereWins after death the highest sphere.As from a serpent's deadly tooth,We shrink from him who scorns the truth.For holy truth is root and springOf justice and each holy thing,A might that every power transcends,Linked to high bliss that never ends.Truth is all virtue's surest base,Supreme in worth and first in place.

Oblations, gifts men offer here,
Vows, sacrifice, and rites austere,And Holy Writ, on truth depend:So men must still that truth defend.Truth, only truth protects the land,By truth unharmed our houses stand;Neglect of truth makes men distressed,And truth in highest heaven is blessed.Then how can I, rebellious, breakCommandments which my father spake--I ever* true and faithful found,And by my word of honour bound?My father's bridge of truth shall standUnharmed by my destructive hand:Not folly, ignorance, or greedMy darkened soul shall thus mislead.Have we not heard that God and shadeTurn from the hated offerings paidBy him whose false and fickle mindNo pledge can hold, no promise bind?Truth is all duty: as the soul,It quickens and supports the whole.The good respect this duty: henceIts sacred claims I reverence.The Warrior's duty I despiseThat seeks the wrong in virtue's guise:Those claims I shrink from, which the base,Cruel, and covetous embrace.The heart conceives the guilty thought,

Then by the hand the sin is wrought,
And with the pair is leagued a third,The tongue that speaks the lying word.Fortune and land and name and fameTo man's best care have right and claim;The good will aye to truth adhere,And its high laws must men revere.Base were the deed thy lips would teach,Approved as best by subtle speech.Shall I my plighted promise break,That I these woods my home would make?*Shall I, as Bharat's words advise,My father's solemn charge despise?Firm stands the oath which then beforeMy father's face I soothly swore,Which Queen Kaikeyi's anxious earBejoiced with highest joy to hear.Still in the wood will I remain,With food prescribed my life sustain,And please with fruit and roots and flowersAncestral shades and heavenly powers.Here every sense contented, stillHeeding the bounds of good and ill,My settled course will I pursue,Firm in my faith and ever true.Here in this wild and far retreatWill I my noble task complete;And Fire and Wind and *Moon shall bePartakers of its fruit with me.

A hundred offerings duly wrought
His rank o'er Gods for Indra bought,And mighty saints their heaven securedBy torturing years on earth endured.'   That scoffing plea the hero spurned,     And thus he spake once more,   Chiding, the while his bosom burned,     Jáváli's impious lore:   'Justice, and courage ne'er dismayed,     Pity for all distressed,   Truth, loving honour duly paid     To Brahman, God, and guest--   In these, the true and virtuous say,     Should lives of men be passed:   They form the right and happy way     That leads to heaven at last.
p. 219
My father's thoughtless act I chide   That gave thee honoured place,Whose soul, from virtue turned aside,   Is faithless, dark, and base.We rank the Buddhist with the thief, 
1
   And all the impious crewWho share his sinful disbelief,   And hate the right and true.Hence never should wise kings who seek   To rule their people well,

Admit, before their face to speak,
   The cursed infidel.But twice-born men in days gone by,   Of other sort than thou,Have wrought good deeds, whose glories high   Are fresh among us now:This world they conquered, nor in vain   They strove to win the skies:The twice-born hence pure lives maintain,   And fires of worship rise.Those who in virtue's path delight,   And with the virtuous live,--Whose flames of holy zeal are bright,   Whose hands are swift to give,Who injure none, and good and mild   In every grace excel,Whose lives by sin are undefiled,   We love and honour well.'Thus Rama spoke in righteous rage   *J'av'ali's speech to chide,When thus again the virtuous sage   In truthful words replied:'The atheist's lore I use no more,   Not mine his impious creed:His words and doctrine I abhor,   Assumed at time of need.E'en as I rose to speak with thee,   The fit occasion cameThat bade me use the atheist's plea

   To turn thee from thine aim.
The atheist creed I disavow,   Unsay the words of sin,And use the faithful's language now   Thy favour, Prince, to win.
Footnotes
217:1 It was the custom of Indian women when 
mourning for their absent husbands to bind their hair in 
a long single braid. 
Carey and Marshman translate, 'the one-tailed city,'
Next: Canto CX.: The Sons of Ikshva'ku.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CX.: THE SONS OF IKSHVA'KU. 2
Then spake Vasishtha who perceived
That Ráma's soul was wroth and grieved:
' Well knows the sage J'av'ali all
The changes that the world befall;And but to lead thee to revokeThy purpose were the words he spoke.Lord of the world, now hear from meHow first this world began to be.First water was, and naught beside;There earth was formed that stretches wide.Then with the Gods from out the sameThe Self-existent Brahm'a came.Then Brahm'a  
1b in a boar's disguise
Bade from the deep this earth arise;Then, with his sons of tranquil soul,He made the world and framed the whole,From subtlest ether Brahm'a rose:No end, no loss, no change he knows.A son had he, Mar'ichi styled,And Ka'syap was Mar'ichi's child.From him Vivasvat sprang: from himManu, whose fame shall ne'er be dim.

Manu, who life to mortals gave,
Begot Ikshv'aku good and brave:First of Ayodhya's kings was he,Pride of her famous dynasty.From him the glorious Kukshi sprang,Whose fame through all the regions rang,Rival of Kukshi's ancient fame.His heir the great Vikukshi came.His son was V'ana, lord of might,His Anaranya, strong in fight.No famine marred his blissful reign,No drought destroyed the kindly grain;Amid the sons of virtue chief,His happy realm ne'er held a thief,His son was Prithn, glorious name,From him the wise Tri'sanku came:Embodied to the skies he wentFor love of truth preeminent.He left a son renowned afar,Known by the name of Dhundhum'ar,His son succeeding bore the nameOf Yuvan'as'va dear to fame.He passed away. Him followed thenHis son M'andh'at'a, king of men.His son was blest in high emprise,Susandhi, fortunate and wise.Two noble sons had he, to witDhruvasandhi and Prasenajit,Bharat was Dhruvasandhi's son:

His glorious arm the conquest won,
Against his son King Asit, roseIn fierce array his royal foes,Haihayas, T'alajanghas styled,And S'as'ivindhus fierce and wild.
p. 220
Long time he strove, but forced to yieldFled from his kingdom and the field.The wives he left had both conceived--So is the ancient tale believed:--One, of her rival's hopes afraid,Fell poison in the viands laid.It chanced that Chyavan, Bhrigu's child,Had wandered to the pathless wildWhere proud Hima'laya's lovely heightDetained him with a strange delight.Then came the other widowed queenWith lotus eyes and beauteous mien,Longing a noble son to bear,And wooed the saint with earnest prayer.When thus Kal'indi', fairest dameWith reverent supplication came,To her the holy sage replied:'O royal lady, from thy sideA glorious son shall spring ere long,Righteous and true and brave and strong;He, scourge of foes and lofty-souled,

His ancient race shall still uphold.'
   Then round the sage the lady went,And bade farewell, most reverent.Back to her home she turned once more,And there her promised son she bore.Because her rival mixed the baneTo render her conception vain,And her unripened fruit destroy,Sagar she called her rescued boy. 
1
He, when he paid that solemn rite, 2
Filled living creatures with affright:Obedient to his high decreeHis countless sons dug out the sea.Prince Asamanj was Sagar's child:But him with cruel sin defiledAnd loaded with the people's hateHis father banished from the state.To Asamanj his consort bareBright Ans'uma'n his valiant heir.Ans'uma'n's son, Dili'pa famed,Begot a son Bhagi'rath named.From him renowned Kakutstha came:Thou bearest still the lineal name,Kakutstha's son was Raghu: thouArt styled the son of Raghu now,From him came Purusha'dak bold,Fierce hero of gigantic mould:Kalma'shapa'da s name he bore,Because his feet were spotted o'er.

Sankhan his son, to manhood grown,
Died sadly with his host o'erthrown,But ere he perished sprang from himSudars'an fair in face and limb.From beautiful Sudarsa'n camePrince Agnivarna, bright as flame.His son was S'ighragn, for speedUnmatched; and Maru was his seed.
Prasusruka was Maru's child:
His son was Ambari'sha styled.Nahush was Ambari'sha's heirWith hand to strike and heart to dare.His son was good Na'bha'g, from youthRenowned for piety and truth.From great Na'bha'g sprang children twoAja and Suvrat pure and true.From Aja Das'aratha came,Whose virtuous life was free from blameHis eldest son art thou: his throne,O famous Kama, is thine own.Accept the sway so justly thine.And view the world with eyes benign.For ever in Iksava'ku's raceThe eldest takes his father's place,And while he lives no son besideAs lord and king is sanctified.   The rule by Raghu's children kept     Thou must not spurn to-day.

   This realm of peerless wealth accept,
     And like thy father sway.'
Footnotes
219:1 The verses in a different metre with which some 
cantos end are all to be regarded with suspicion. 
Schlegel regrets that he did not exclude them all from his edition. These lines are manifestly spurious. See Additional Notes.
219:2 This genealogy is a repetition with slight 
variation of that given in Book I. Canto LXX.
219:1b In Gorresio's recension identified with Vishnu. See Muir's Sanskrit Texts, Vol.IV pp 29, 30.
220:1 From sa with, and aara poison.
220:2 See Book I. Canto XL.
Next: Canto CXI.: Counsel To Bharat.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXI.: COUNSEL TO BHARAT.
Thus said Vas'ishtha, and again.
To Ráma spake in duteous strain:' All men the light of life who seeWith high respect should look on three:High honour ne'er must be deniedTo father, mother, holy guide.First to their sires their birth they owe,Nursed with maternal love they grow:Their holy guides fair knowledge teach:So men should love and honour each.Thy sire and thou have learned of me,The sacred guide of him and thee,And if my word thou wilt obeyThou still* wilt keep the virtuous way.See, with the chiefs of every guildAnd all thy friends, this place is filled:All these, as duty bids, protect;So still the righteous path respect.O, for thine aged mother feel,Nor spurn the virtuous dame's appeal:Obey, O Prince, thy mother dear,And still to virtue's path adhere.Yield thou to Bharat's fond request,With earnest supplication pressed,

So wilt thou to thyself be true,
And faith and duty still pursue.'   Thus by his saintly guide addressedWith pleas in sweetest tones expressed.The lord of men in turn repliedTo wise Vas'ishtha by his side:'The fondest son's observance ne'erRepays the sire and mother's care:
p. 221
The constant love that food provides.And dress, and every need besides:Their pleasant words still soft and mild,Their nurture of the helpless child:The words which Das'aratha spake,My king and sire, I ne'er will break.'
Then Bharat of the ample chest
The wise Sumantra thus addressed;'Bring sacred grass, O charioteer,And strew it on the level here.For I will sit and watch his faceUntil I win my brother's grace.Like a robbed Bráhman will I lie,  
1
Nor taste of food nor turn my eye,In front of Ráma's leafy cot,And till he yield will leave him not.'

When Bharat saw Sumantra's eye
Looked up to Ráma for reply,The Prince himself in eager hasteThe sacred grass in order placed.Him great and mighty Ráma, bestOf royal saints, in turn addressed:'What, Bharat, have I done, that thouBesiegest me,  
2 a suppliant now?
Thus streched, to force redress for wrongsTo men of Bráhman birth belongs,Not those upon whose kingly headThe consecrating drops are shed.Up, lord of men! arise, and quitThis fearful vow for thee unfit.Go, brother, seek Ayodhyá's town,Fair city ot supreme renown.'
But Bharat, as his seat he took.
Cast all around an eager look:'O people, join your prayers with mine,And so his stubborn heart incline.'
And all the people answered thus:
'Full well is Ráma known to us.Right is the word he speaks and heIs faithful to his sire's decree:Nor can we rushly venture nowTo turn him from his purposed vow.'

Then Ráma spoke: 'O Bharat, heed
Thy virtuous friends, and mark their rede.Mark well what I and these advise,And duty view with clearer eyes.Thy hand on mine, O hero, place,Touch water, and thy sin efface.'
Then Bharat rose: his hand he dipped,
And purifying water sipped:'Each citizen,' he cried, 'give ear,Attend, each counsellor and peer.My mother planned, by me untaught,To win the sway I never sought:
Ne'er Raghu's son could I despise,
In duty's lore supremely wise.Now if obedience to our sireThis dwelling in the woods require,I, till the destined years he spent,Will dwell alone in banishment.'
The virtuous Ráma, wonder-stirred.
The faithful speech of Bharat heard,And thus the hero's feelings foundDue utterance, as he gazed around:
'Still to my father's word I hold,
Whate'er he bought, or pledged, or sold:Ne'er shall his living promise be

Annulled by Bharat or by me.
Not thus my task will I evade,My exile on another laid:Most wise was Queen Kaikeyí's rede,And just and good my father's deed.Dear Bharat's patient soul I know,How reverence due he loves to show;In him, high-souled and faithful found,Must each auspicious grace abound.When from the woods I turn againI with his aid shall nobly reign,With one so good, of peerless worth,A glorious lord of happy earth.Her boon Kaikeyí sought and won.I, as my father swore, have done:And O, do thou, my brother dear,The monarch's name from falsehood clear.
Footnotes
221:1 A practice which has frequently been described, 
under the name of dherna, by European travellers in 
India.
221:2 Compare Milton's 'beseeching or beseiging.'

Next: Canto CXII.: The Sandals.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXII.: THE SANDALS.
High wonder mingled with delight
Took the great sages at the sight.Thrilling their breasts who came to viewThe meeting of the peerless two.The saints and sages' holy trainDeparted to their home again.And high each holy voice was raised,And thus the glorious brothers praised.
'High fate is his, the sire of two
Most virtuous sous, so brave and true:With wonder and with joy intenseOur ears have heard their conference.Then the great sages, longing allTo see the ten-necked tyrant  
1b fall,
To Bharat, bravest of the brave,Their salutary counsel gave:
'O thou of lofty lineage born,
Whom wisdom, conduct, fame adorn,Thou for thy honoured father's sakeShouldst Ráma's righteous counsel take.

p. 222
All debts to Queen Kaikeyí paid,
Thy sire his home in heaven has made,So virtuous Ráma we would seeFrom filial obligation free.'Thus gave each royal sage advice,High saint, and bard of Paradise;Then quickly vanishing from viewEach to his proper home withdrew.Then Ráma's face his rapture showed,And his full heart with joy o'erflowed,While, as the sages parted thence,He paid his humble reverence.
Then Bharat shook in every limb
As suppliant thus he spake to him:'The duty of a king respect,Held by our race in high respect:And O, thy gracious ear inclineTo heed my mother's prayer and mine.The mighty realm to rule and guardFor me alone is task too hard.No power have I the love to gainOf noble, citizen, and swain.All those who know thee, warrior, friend,On thee their eager glances bend,As labouring hinds who till the plainLook fondly for the Lord of Rain.

O wisest Prince, thy realm secure,
And make its firm foundations sure.Kakutstha's son, thy mighty armCan keep the nation free from harm.'He spoke, and fell in sorrow drownedAt Ráma's feet upon the ground,And there the hero sued and sighed,And 'Hear me, Raghu's son,' he cried.
Then Ráma raised him up, and pressed
His brother to his loving breast,And sweetly as a wild swan criedTo Bharat dark and lotus-eyed:
'So just and true thy generous soul,
Thy hand may well this earth control:But many a sage his aid will lend.With counsellor, and peer, and friend:With these advise: their counsel ask,And so perform thy arduous task.The moon his beauty may forgo,The cold forsake the Hills of Snow,And Ocean o'er his banks may sweep,But I my father's word will keep.Now whether love of thee or greedThy mother led to plan the deed,Forth from thy breast the memory throw,And filial love and reverence show.'Thus spake Kaus'alyá's son: again

Bharat replied in humble strain
To him who matched the sun in mightAnd lovely as the young moon's light:'Put, noble brother, I entreat,These sandals on thy blessed feet:These, lord of men, with gold bedecked,The realm and people will protect.'
Then Ráma, as his brother prayed
Beneath his feet the sandals laid,And these with fond affection gaveTo Bharat's hand, the good and brave.Then Bharat bowed his reverent headAnd thus again to Ráma said:'Through fourteen seasons will I wearThe hermit's dress and matted hair:With fruit and roots my life sustain,And still beyond the realm remain,Longing for thee to come again.The rule and all affairs of stateI to these shoes will delegate.And if, O tamer of thy foes,When fourteen years have reached their close,I see thee not that day return,The kindled fire my frame shall burn.
Then Ráma to his bosom drew
Dear Bharat and S'atrughna too:'Be never wroth,' he cried, 'with her,

Kaikeyí's guardian minister:
This, glory of Ikshváku's line,Is Sítá's earnest prayer and mine.'He spoke, and as the big tears fell,To his dear brother bade farewell.Round Ráma, Bharat strong and bold     In humble reverence paced,   When the bright sandals wrought with gold     Above his brows were placed.   The royal elephant who led     The glorious pomp he found,   And on the monster's mighty head     Those sandals duly bound.   Then noble Rama, born to swell     The glories of his race,   To all in order bade farewell     With love and tender grace--   To brothers, counsellers, and peers,--     Still firm, in duty proved,   Firm, as the Lord of Snow uprears     His mountains unremoved.   No queen, for choking sobs and sighs,     Could say her last adieu:   Then Ráma bowed, with flooded eyes,     And to his cot withdrew.
Footnotes

221:1b Ten-headed, ten-necked, ten faced, are common 
epithets of Rávan the great king of Lanká.
Next: Canto CXIII.: Bharat's Beturn.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXIII.: BHARAT'S BETURN.
Bearing the sandals on his head
Away triumphant Bharat sped,And clomb, S'atrughna by his side,The car wherein he wont to ride.Before the mighty army wentThe lords for counsel eminent,Vas'ishtha, Vámadeva next,Jáváli, pure with prayer and text.
p. 223
Then from that lovely river theyTurned eastward on their homeward way:With reverent steps from left to rightThey circled Chitrakúta's height,And viewed his peaks on every sideWith stains of thousand metals dyed.Then Bharat saw, not far away,Where Bharadwája's dwelling lay,And when the chieftain bold and sageHad reached that holy hermitage,Down from the car he sprang to greetThe saint, and bowed before his feet.High rapture filled the hermit's breast,

Who thus the royal prince addressed:
'Say, Bharat, is thy duty done?Hast thou with Ráma met, my son?'
The chief whose soul to virtue clave
This answer to the hermit gave:'I prayed him with our holy guide:But Raghu's son our prayer denied,And long besought by both of usHe answered Saint Vas'ishtha thus:'True to my vow, I still will beObservant of my sire's decree:Till fourteen years complete their courseThat promise shall remain in force.'The saint in highest wisdom caught,These solemn words with wisdom fraught,To him in lore of language learnedMost eloquent himself returned:'Obey my rede: let Bharat holdThis pair of sandals decked with gold:They in Ayodhyá shall ensureOur welfare, and our bliss secure.'When Ráma heard the royal priestHe rose, and looking to the eastConsigned the sandals to my handThat they for him might guard the land.Then from the high-souled chief's abodeI turned upon my homeward road,Dismissed by him, and now this pair

Of sandals to Ayodhyá bear.'
To him the hermit thus replied,
Bv Bharat's tidings gratified:'No marvel thoughts so just and true,Thou best of all who right pursue,Should dwell in thee, O Prince of men,As waters gather in the glen.He is not dead,we mourn in vain:Thy blessed father lives again,Whose noble son we thus beholdLike Virtue's self in human mould.'He ceased: before him Bharat fellTo clasp his feet, and said farewell:His reverent steps around him bent,And onward to Ayodhyá went.His host of followers stretching farWith many an elephant and car,Waggon and steed, and mighty train,Traversed their homeward way again.O'er holy Yamuná they sped,Fair stream, with waves engarlanded,And then once more the rivers' queen,The blessed Gangá's self was seen.Then making o'er that flood his way,Where crocodiles and monsters lay,The king to S'ringavera drewHis host and royal retinue.His onward way he thence pursued,

And soon renowned Ayodhyá viewed.
Then burnt by woe and sad of cheerBharat addressed the charioteer:'Ah, see, Ayodhyá dark and sad,Her glory gone, once bright and glad:Of joy and beauty reft, forlorn,In silent grief she seems to mourn.'
Next: Canto CXIV.: Bharat's Departure.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXIV.: BHARAT'S DEPARTURE.
Deep, pleasant was the chariot's sound
As royal Bharat, far renowned,Whirled by his mettled coursers fastWithin Ayodhyá's city passed.There dark and drear was every homeWhere cats and owls had space to roam,As when the shades of midnight fallWith blackest gloom, and cover all:As Rohiní, dear spouse of himWhom Rahu  
1 hates, grows faint and dim,
When, as she shines on high aloneThe demon's shade is o'er her thrown:As burnt by summer's heat a rillScarce trickling from her parent hill,With dying fish in pools half dried,And fainting birds upon her side:As sacrificial flames ariseWhen holy oil their food supplies,But when no more the fire is fedSink lustreless and cold and dead:Like some brave host that filled the plain,With harness rent and captains slain,When warrior, elephant, and steedMingled in wild confusion bleed:

As when, all spent her store of worth,
Rocks from her base the loosened earth:Like a sad fallen star no moreWearing the lovely light it wore:So mournful in her lost estateWas that sad town disconsolate.Then car-borne Bharat, good and brave,Thus spake to him the steeds who drave:'Why are Ayodhyá's streets so mute!Where is the voice of lyre and lute?Why sounds not, as of old, to-dayThe music of the minstrel's lay?
p. 224
Where are the wreaths they used to twine?Where are the blossoms and the wine?Where is the cool refreshing scentOf sandal dust with aloe blent?The elephant's impatient roar,The din of cars, I hear no more:No more the horse's pleasant neighRings out to meet me on my way.Ayodhyá's youths, since Ráma's flight,Have lost their relish for delight:Her men roam forth no more, nor careBright garlands round their necks to wear.All grieve for banished Ráma: feast,And revelry and song have ceased:

Like a black night when floods pour down,
So dark and gloomy is the town.When will he come to make them gayLike some auspicious holiday?When will my brother, like a cloudAt summer's close, make glad the crowd?'   Then through the streets the hero rode,And passed within his sire's abode,Like some deserted lion's den,Forsaken by the lord of men.Then to the inner bowers he came,Once happy home of many a dame,   Now gloomy, sad, and drear,Dark as of old that sunless dayWhen wept the Gods in wild dismay; 
1
   There poured he many a tear.
Footnotes
223:1 The spouse of Rohini is the Moon: Rahu is the 
demon who causes eclipses.
Next: Canto CXV.: Nandigrám. 

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXV.: NANDIGRÁM.  2
Then when the pious chief had seen
Lodged in her home each widowed queen,Still with his burning grief oppressedHis holy guides he thus addressed:'I go to Nandigrám: adieu,This day, my lords to all of you:I go, my load of grief to bear,Reft of the son of Raghu, there.The king my sire, alas, is dead.And Ráma to the forest fled;There will I wait till he, restored,Shall rule the realm, its lightful lord.'   They heard the high-souled prince's speech,And thus with ready answer eachOf those great lords their chief addressed.
With saint Vas'ishtha and the rest:
'Good are the words which thou hast said,By brotherly affection led,Like thine own self, a faithful friend,True to thy brother to the end:A heart like thine must all approve,Which naught from virtue's path can move,'

Soon as the words he loved to hear
Fell upon Bharat's joyful ear,Thus to the charioteer he spoke:'My car witn speed, Sumantra, yoke.'Tnen Bharat with delighted mienObeisance paid to every queen,And with S'atrughna by his sideMounting the car away he hied.With lords, and priests in long arrayTne brothers hastened on their way.And the great pomp the Bráhmans ledWith Saint Vas'ishtha at their head.Then every face was eastward bentAs on to Nundigrám they went.Behind the army followed, allUnsummoned by their leader's call,And steeds and elephants and menStreamed forth with every citizen.As Bharat in his chariot rodeHis heart with love fraternal glowed,And with the sandals on his headTo Nundigrám he quickly sped.Within the town he swiftly pressed,Alighted, and his guides addressed:'To me in trust my brother's handConsigned the lordship of the land,When he these gold-wrought sandals gaveAs emblems to protect and save.'Then Bharat bowed, and from his head

The sacred pledge deposited,
And thus to all the people criedWho ringed him round on every side:'Haste, for these sandals quickly bringThe canopy that shades the king.Pay ye to them all reverence meetAs to my elder brother's feet,For they will right and law maintainUntil King Ráma come again.My brother with a loving mindThese sandals to my charge consigned:I till he come will guard with careThe sacred trust for Raghu's heir.My watchful task will soon be done,The pledge restored to Raghu's son;Then shall I see, his wanderings o'er,These sandals on his feet once more.My brother I shall meet at last,The burthen from my shoulders cast,To Ráma's hand the realm restoreAnd serve my elder as before.When Rama takes again this pairOf sandals kept with pious care,And here his glorious reign begins,I shall be cleansed from all my sins,
p. 225
When the glad people's voices ring

With welcome to the new-made king,
Joy will be mine four-fold as greatAs if supreme I ruled the state.'
Thus humbly spoke in sad lament
The chief in fame preëminent:Thus, by his reverent lords obeyed,At Nandigrám the kingdom swayed.With hermit's dress and matted hairHe dwelt with all his army there.The sandals of his brother's feetInstalled upon the royal seat,He, all his powers to them referred,Affairs of state administered.   In every care, in every task,     When golden store was brought,   He first, as though their rede to ask,    Those royal sandals sought.
Footnotes
224:1 'Once,' says the Commentator Tirtha, 'in the battle 
between the Gods and demons the Gods were 
vanquished, and the sun was overthrown by Ráhu. At the request of the Gods Atri undertook the management of the sun for a week.'

224:2 Now Nundgaon, in Oudh.
Next: Canto CXVI.: The Hermit's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXVI.: THE HERMIT'S SPEECH.
When Bharat took his homeward road
Still Ráma in the wood abode:But soon he marked the fear and careThat darkened all the hermits there.For all who dwelt before the hillWere sad with dread of coming ill:Each holy brow was lined by thought,And Ráma's side they often sought.With gathering frowns the prince they eyed,And then withdrew and talked aside.
Then Raghu's son with anxious breast
The leader of the saints addressed:'Can aught that I have done displease,O reverend Sage, the devotees?Why are their loving looks, O say,Thus sadly changed or turned away?Has Lakshman through his want of heedOffended with unseemly deed!Or is the gentle Sítá, sheWho loved to honour you and me--Is she the cause of this offence,Failing in lowly reverence?'

One sage, o'er whom, exceeding old,
Had many a year of penance rolled,Trembling in every aged limbThus for the rest replied to him:'How could we, O beloved, blameThy lofty-souled Videhan dame,Who in the good of all delights,And more than all of anchorites?But yet through thee a numbing dreadOf fiends among our band has spread;Obstructed by the demons' artThe trembling hermits talk apart.For Rávan's brother, overbold,Named Khara, of gigantic mould,Vexes with fury fierce and fellAll those in Janasthán  
1 who dwell.
Resistless in his cruel deeds,On flesh of men the monster feeds:Sinful and arrogant is he,And looks with special hate on thee.Since thou, beloved son, hast madeThy home within this holy shade,The fiends have vexed with wilder rageThe dwellers of the hermitage.In many a wild and dreadful formAround the trembling saints they swarm,With hideous shape and foul disguiseThey terrify our holy eyes.They make our loathing souls endure

Insult and scorn and sights impure,
And flocking round the altars stayThe holy rites we love to pay.In every spot throughout the groveWith evil thoughts the monsters rove,Assailing with their secret mightEach unsuspecting anchorite.Ladle and dish away they fling,Our fires with floods extinguishing,And when the sacred flame should burnThey trample on each water-urn.Now when they see their sacred woodPlagued by this impious brotherhood,The troubled saints away would roamAnd seek in other shades a home:Hence will we fly, O Ráma, ereThe cruel fiends our bodies tear.Not far away a forest liesRich in the roots and fruit we prize,To this will I and all repairAnd join the holy hermits there;Be wise, and with us thither fleeBefore this Khara injure thee.Mighty art thou, O Ráma, yetEach day with peril is beset.If with thy consort by thy sideThou in this wood wilt still abide.'
He ceased: the words the hero spake

The hermit's purpose failed to break:
To Raghu's son farewell he said,And blessed the chief and comforted;Then with the rest the holy sageDeparted from the hermitage.
So from the wood the saints withdrew,
And Ráma bidding all adieu   In lowly reverence bent:Instructed by their friendly speech,Blest with the gracious love of each,   To his pure home he went.Nor would the son of Raghu strayA moment from that grove away   From which the saints had fled.And many a hermit thither cameAttracted by his saintly fame   And the pure life he led.
p. 226
Footnotes
225:1 A part of the great Dandak forest.

Next: Canto CXVII.: Anasúyá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXVII.: ANASÚYÁ.
But dwelling in that lonely spot
Left by the hermits pleased him not.'I met the faithful Bharat here,The townsmen, and my mother dear:The painful memory lingers yet,And stings me with a vain regret.And here the host of Bharat camped,And many a courser here has stamped,And elephants with ponderous feetHave trampled through the calm retreat.'So forth to seek a home he hied,His spouse and Lakshman by his side.He came to Atri's pure retreat.Paid reverence to his holy feet,And from the saint such welcome wonAs a fond father gives his son.The noble prince with joy unfeignedAs a dear guest he entertained,And cheered the glorious Lakshman tooAnd Sítá with observance due.Then Anasúyá at the callOf him who sought the good of all,His blameless venerable spouse,Delighting in her holy vows,

Came from her chamber to his side:
To her the virtuous hermit cried:'Receive, I pray, with friendly graceThis dame of Maithil monarchs' race:To Ráma next made known his wife,The devotee of saintliest life:'Ten thousand years this votaress bentOn sternest rites of penance spent;She when the clouds withheld their rain,And drought ten years consumed the plain,Caused grateful roots and fruit to growAnd ordered Gangá here to flow:So from their cares the saints she freed,Nor let these checks their rites impede,She wrought in Heaven's behalf, and madeTen nights of one, the Gods to aid:  
1
Let holy Anasúyá beAn honoured mother, Prince, to thee.Let thy Videhan spouse draw nearTo her whom all that live revere,Stricken in years, whose loving mindIs slow to wrath and ever kind.'
He ceased: and Ráma gave assent,
And said, with eyes on Sítá bent:'O Princess, thou hast heard with meThis counsel of the devotee:Now that her touch thy soul may bless,Approach the saintly votaress:

Come to the venerable dame,
Far known by Anasúyá's name:The mighty things that she has doneHigh glory in the world have won.'
Thus spoke the son of Raghu: she
Approached the saintly devotee,Who with her white locks, old and frail,Shook like a plantain in the gale.To that true spouse she bowed her head,And 'Lady, I am Sítá,' said:Raised suppliant hands and prayed her tellThat all was prosperous and well.
The aged matron, when she saw
Fair Sítá true to duty's law,Addressed her thus: ' High fate is thineWhose thoughts to virtue still incline.
Thou, lady of the noble mind,
Hast kin and state and wealth resigned
To follow Ráma forced to treadWhere solitary woods are spread.Those women gain high spheres above
Who still unchanged their husbands love,
Whether they dwell in town or wood,
Whether their hearts be ill or good.Though wicked, poor, or led awayIn love's forbidden paths to stray,

The noble matron still will deem
Her lord a deity supreme.Regarding kin and friendship, ICan see no better, holier tie,And every penance-rite is dimBeside the joy of serving him.But dark is this to her whose mindPromptings of idle fancy blind,Who led by evil thoughts awayMakes him who should command obey.Such women, O dear Maithil dame,Their virtue lose and honest fame,Enslaved by sin and folly, ledIn these unholy paths to tread.But they who good and true like theeThe present and the future see,Like men by holy deeds will riseTo mansions in the blissful skies.   So keep thee pure from taint of sin,     Still to thy lord be true,   And fame and merit shalt thou win,     To thy devotion due.'
Footnotes
226:1 When the saint Mándavya had doomed some 
saint's wife, who was Anasúyá's friend, to become a 

widow on the morrow.
Next: Canto CXVIII.: Anasúyá's Gifts.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXVIII.: ANASÚYÁ'S GIFTS.
Thus by the holy dame addressed
Who banished envy from her breast,Her lowly reverence Sítá paid,And softly thus her answer made:'No marvel, best of dames, thy speechThe duties of a wife should teach;
p. 227
Yet I, O lady, also knowDue reverence to my lord to show.Were he the meanest of the base,Unhonoured with a single grace,My husband still I ne'er would leave,But firm through all to him would cleave:Still rather to a lord like mineWhose virtues high-exalted shine,Compassionate, of lofty soul,Vith every sense in due control,True in his love, of righteous mind,Like a dear sire and mother kind.E'en as he ever loves to treatKaus'alyá with observance meet,Has his behaviour ever been

To every other honoured queen.
Nay, more, a sonlike reverence showsThe noble Ráma e'en to thoseOn whom the king his father setHis eyes one moment, to forget.Deep in my heart the words are stored,Said by the mother of my lord,When from my home I turned awayIn the lone fearful woods to stray.The counsel of my mother deepImpressed upon my soul I keep,When by the fire I took my stand,And Ráma clasped in his my hand.And in my bosom cherished yet,My friends' advice I ne'er forget:Woman her holiest offering paysWhen she her husband's will obeys.Good Sávitrí her lord obeyed,And a high saint in heaven was made,And for the self-same virtue thouHast heaven in thy possession now.And she with whom no dame could vie,Now a bright Goddess in the sky,Sweet Rohiní the Moon's dear Queen,Without her lord is never seen:And many a faithful wife besideFor her pure love is glorified.'   Thus Sítá spake: soft rapture stoleThrough Anasúyá's saintly soul:

Kisses on Sítá's head she pressed,
And thus the Maithil dame addressed:'I by long rites and toils enduredRich store of merit have secured:From this my wealth will I bestowA blessing ere I let thee go.So right and wise and true each wordThat from thy lips mine ears have heard,I love thee: be my pleasing taskTo grant the boon that thou shalt ask.'   Then Sítá marvelled much, and whilePlayed o'er her lips a gentle smile,'All has been done, O Saint, she cried,And naught remains to wish beside.   She spake; the lady's meek replySwelled Anasúyá's rapture high.'Sítá,' she said,' my gift to-dayThy sweet contentment shall repay.Accept this precious robe to wear,Of heavenly fabric, rich and rare,These gems thy limbs to ornament,This precious balsam sweet of scent.O Maithil dame, this gift of mineShall make thy limbs with beauty shine,And breathing o'er thy frame dispenseIts pure and lasting influence.This balsam on thy fair limbs spreadNew radiance on thy lord shall shed,As Lakshmí's beauty lends a grace

To Vishnu's own celestial face.'
   Then Sítá took the gift the dameBestowed on her in friendship's name,The balsam, gems, and robe divine,And garlands wreathed of bloomy twine;Then sat her down, with reverence meet,At saintly Anasúyá's feet.The matron rich in rites and vowsTurned her to Ráma's Maithil spouse,And questioned thus in turn to hearA pleasant tale to charm her ear:'Sítá, 'tis said that Raghu's sonThy hand, mid gathered suitors, won.I fain would hear thee, lady, tellThe story as it all befell:Do thou repeat each thing that passed,Reviewing all from first to last.'   Thus spake the dame to Sítá: sheReplying to the devotee,'Then, lady, thy attention lend,'Rehearsed the story to the end:   King Janak, just and brave and strong.Who loves the right and hates the wrong.Well skilled in what the law ordainsFor Warriors, o'er Videha reigns.Guiding one morn the plough, his handMarked out, for rites the sacred land,When, as the ploughshare cleft the earth,Child of the king I leapt to birth.

Then as the ground he smoothed and cleared,
He saw me all with dust besmeared,And on the new-found babe, amazedThe ruler of Videha gazed.In childless love the monarch pressedThe welcome infant to his breast:'My daughter,' thus he cried, 'is she:'And as his child he cared for me.Forth from the sky was heard o'erheadAs 'twere a human voice that said:'Yea, even so: great King, this childHenceforth thine own be justly styled.'Videha's monarch, virtuous souled,Rejoiced o'er me with joy untold,Delighting in his new-won prize,The darling of his heart and eyes.To his chief queen of saintly mindThe precious treasure he consigned,And by her side she saw me grow,Nursed with the love which mothers know.'
p. 228
Then as he saw the seasons fly,And knew my marriage-time was nigh,My sire was vexed with care, as sadAs one who mourns the wealth he had:'Scorn on the maiden's sire must waitFrom men of high and low estate:

The virgin's father all despise,
Though Indra's peer, who rules the skies.'More near he saw, and still more near,The scorn that filled his soul with fear,On trouble's billowy ocean tossed,Like one whose shattered bark is lost.My father knowing how I came,No daughter of a mortal dame.In all the regions failed to seeA bridegroom meet to match with me.Each way with anxious thought he scanned,And thus at length the monarch planned:'The Bride's Election will I hold,With every rite prescribed of old.'It pleased King Varun to bestowQuiver and shafts and heavenly bowUpon my father's sire who reigned,When Daksha his great rite ordained.Where was the man might bend or liftWith utmost toil that wondrous gift?Not e'en in dreams could mortal kingStrain the great bow or draw the string.Of this tremendous bow possessed,My truthful father thus addressedThe lords of many a region, allAssembled at the monarch's call:'Whoe'er this bow can manage, heThe husband of my child shall be.'The suitors viewed with hopeless eyes

That wondrous bow of mountain size,
Then to my sire they bade adieu,And all with humbled hearts withdrew.At length with Vis'vámitra cameThis son of Raghu, dear to fame,The royal sacrifice to view.Near to my father's home he drew,His brother Lakshman by his side,Ráma, in deeds heroic tried.My sire with honour entertainedThe saint in lore of duty trained,Who thus in turn addressed the king:'Ráma and Lakshman here who springFrom royal Das'aratha, longTo see thy bow so passing strong.'
Before the prince's eyes was laid
That marvel, as the Bráhman prayed.One moment on the bow he gazed,Quick to the notch the string he raised,Then, in the wandering people's view,The cord with mighty force he drew.Then with an awful crash as loudAs thunderbolts that cleave the cloud,The bow beneath the matchless strainOf arms heroic snapped in twain.Thus, giving purest water, he,My sire, to Ráma offered me.The prince the offered gift declined

Till he should learn his father's mind;
So horsemen swift Ayodhyá soughtAnd back her aged monarch brought.Me then my sire to Ráma gave,Self-ruled, the bravest of the brave.And Urmilá, the next to me,Graced with all gifts, most fair to see,My sire with Raghu's house allied.And gave her to be Lakshman's bride.Thus from the princes of the landLord Ráma won my maiden hand,And him exalted high aboveHeroic chiefs I truly love.
        * * * * *'
Next: Canto CXIX.: The Forest.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXIX.: THE FOREST.
When Anasúyá, virtuous-souled,
Had heard the tale by Sítá told,She kissed the lady's brow and lacedHer loving arms around her waist.'With sweet-toned words distinct and clearThy pleasant tale has charmed mine ear,How the great king thy father heldThat Maiden's Choice unparalleled.But now the sun has sunk from sight,And left the world to holy Night.Hark! how the leafy thickets soundWith gathering birds that twitter round:They sought their food by day, and allFlock homeward when the shadows fall.See, hither comes the hermit band,Each with his pitcher in his hand:Fresh from the bath, their locks are wet,Their coats of bark are dripping yet.Here saints their fires of worship tend,And curling wreaths of smoke ascend:Borne on the flames they mount above,Dark as the brown wings of the dove.The distant trees, though well-nigh bare,Gloom thickenend by the evening air,

And in the faint uncertain light
Shut the horizon from our sight.The beasts that prowl in darkness roveOn every side about the grove,And the tame deer, at ease reclinedTheir shelter near the altars find.The night o'er all the sky is spread,With lunar stars engarlanded,And risen in his robes of lightThe moon is beautifully bright,Now to thy lord I bid thee go:Thy pleasant tale has charmed me so:One thing alone I needs must pray,Before me first thyself array:Here in thy heavenly raiment shine,And glad, dear love, these eyes of mine.'
p. 229
Then like a heavenly Goddess shoneFair Sítá with that raiment on.She bowed her to the matron's feet,Then turned away her lord to meet.The hero prince with joy surveyedHis Sítá, in her robes arrayed,As glorious to his arms she cameWith love-gifts of the saintly dame.She told him how the saint to showHer fond affection would bestow

That garland of celestial twine,
Those ornaments and robes divine.Then Ráma's heart, nor Lakshman's less,Was filled with pride and happiness,For honours high had Sítá gained,Which mortal dames have scarce obtained.There honoured by each pious sageWho dwelt within the hermitage,Beside his darling well contentThat sacred night the hero spent.
The princes, when the night had fled,
Farewell to all the hermits said,Who gazed upon the distant shade,Their lustral rites and offerings paid.The saints who made their dwelling thereIn words like these addressed the pair:'O Princes, monsters fierce and fellAround that distant forest dwell:On blood from human veins they feed,And various forms assume at need,With savage beasts of fearful powerThat human flesh and blood devour.Our holy saints they rend and tearWhen met alone or unaware,And eat them in their cruel joy:These chase, O Ráma, or destroy.By this one path our hermits goTo fetch the fruits that yonder grow:

By this, O Prince, thy feet should stray
Through pathless forests far away.'
Thus by the reverent saints addressed,
And by their prayers auspicious blessed,   He left the holy crowd:His wife and brother by his side,Within the mighty wood he hied.So sinks the Day-God in his pride   Beneath a bank of cloud.
Next: Book III

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
BOOK III.
Next: Canto I.: The Hermitage.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO I.: THE HERMITAGE.
When Ráma, valiant hero, stood
In the vast shade of Dandak wood,His eyes on every side he bentAnd saw a hermit settlement,Where coats of bark were hung around,And holy grass bestrewed the ground.Bright with Bráhmanic lustre glowedThat circle where the saints abode:Like the hot sun in heaven it shone,Too dazzling to be looked upon.Wild creatures found a refuge whereThe court, well-swept, was bright and fair:And countless birds and roedeer madeTheir dwelling in the friendly shade.Beneath the boughs of well-loved treesOft danced the gay Apsarases.  
1
Around was many an ample shedWherein the holy fire was fed;With sacred grass and skins of deer,Ladles and sacrificial gear,And roots and fruit, and wood to burn,And many a brimming water-urn.Tall trees their hallowed branches spread,Laden with pleasant fruit, o'erhead;

And gifts which holy laws require,  2
And solemn offerings burnt with fire,  3
And Veda chants on every side
That home of hermits sanctified.There many a flower its odour shed,And lotus blooms the lake o'erspred.There, clad in coats of bark and hide,--Their food by roots and fruit supplied,--Dwelt many an old and reverend sireBright as the sun or Lord of Fire,All with each worldly sense subdued,A pure and saintly multitude.The Veda chants, the saints who trodThe sacred ground and mused on God,Made that delightful grove appearLike Brahmá's own most glorious sphere.As Raghu's splendid son surveyedThat hermit home and tranquil shade,He loosed his mighty bow-string, thenDrew nearer to the holy men.
p. 230
With keen celestial sight enduedThose mighty saints the chieftain viewed,With joy to meet the prince they came,And gentle Sítá dear to fame.They looked on virtuous Ráma, fairAs Soma  
1 in the evening air,

And Lakshman by his brother's side,
And Sítá long in duty tried,And with glad blessings every sageReceived them in the hermitage.Then Ráma's form and stature tallEntranced the wondering eyes of all,--His youthful grace, his strength of limb,And garb that nobly sat on him.To Lakshman too their looks they raised,And upon Sítá's beauty gazedWith eyes that closed not lest their sightShould miss the vision of delight.Then the pure hermits of the wood,Rejoicing in all creatures' good,Their guest, the glorious Ráma, ledWithin a cot with leaves o'erhead.With highest honour all the bestOf radiant saints received their guest,With kind observance, as is meet,And gave him water for his feet.To highest pitch of rapture wroughtTheir stores of roots and fruit they brought.They poured their blessings on his head,And 'All we have is thine,' they said.Then, reverent hand to hand applied,  
2
Each duty-loving hermit cried:'The king is our protector, brightIn fame, maintainer of the right.He bears the awful sword, and hence

Deserves an elder's reverence.
One fourth of Indra's essence, hePreserves his realm from danger free,Hence honoured by the world of rightThe king enjoys each choice delight.Thou shouldst to us protection give,For in thy realm, dear lord, we live:Whether in town or wood thou be,Thou art our king, thy people we,Our wordly aims are laid aside,Our hearts are tamed and purified.To thee our guardian, we who earnOur only wealth by penance turn.'
Then the pure dwellers in the shade
To Raghu's son due honour paid,And Lakshman, bringing store of roots,And many a flower, and woodland fruits.
And others strove the prince to please
With all attentive courtesies.
Footnotes
229:1 Heavenly nymphs.

229:2 The (illegible) present food to all created beings.
229:3 The clarified butter &c. cast into the sacred fire.
230:1 The Moon-God: 'he is,' says the commentator, 
'the special deity of bráhmans.'
230:2 Because he was an incarnation of the deity,' says the commentator, 'otherwise such honour paid by men 
of the sacerdotal caste to one of the military would be improper.'
Next: Canto II.: Virádha.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO II.: VIRÁDHA.
Thus entertained he passed the night,
Then, with the morning's early light,To all the hermits bade adieuAnd sought his onward way anew.He pierced the mighty forest whereRoamed many a deer and pard and bear:Its ruined pools he scarce could see.For creeper rent and prostrate tree,Where shrill cicada's cries were heard,And plaintive notes of many a bird.Deep in the thickets of the woodWith Lakshman and his spouse he stood,There in the horrid shade he sawA giant passing nature's law:Vast as some mountain-peak in size,With mighty voice and sunken eyes,Huge, hideous, tall, with monstrous face,Most ghastly of his giant race.A tiger's hide the Rákshas woreStill reeking with the fat and gore:Huge-faced, like Him who rules the dead,All living things he struck with dread.Three lions, tigers four, ten deerHe carried on his iron spear,

Two wolves, an elephant's head beside
With mighty tusks which blood-drops dyed.When on the three his fierce eye fell,He charged them with a roar and yellAs furious as the grisly KingWhen stricken worlds are perishing.Then with a mighty roar that shookThe earth beneath their feet, he tookThe trembling Sítá to his side.Withdrew a little space, and cried:'Ha, short lived wretches, ye who dare,In hermit dress with matted hair,Armed each with arrows, sword, and bow,Through Dandak's pathless wood to go:How with one dame, I bid you tell,Can you among ascetics dwell?Who are ye, sinners, who despiseThe right, in holy men's disguise?The great Virádha, day by dayThrough this deep-tangled wood I stray,And ever, armed with trusty steel,I seize a saint to make my meal.This woman young and fair of frameShall be the conquering giant's dame:Your blood, ye things of evil life,My lips shall quaff in battle strife.'
He spoke: and Janak's hapless child,
Scared by his speech so fierce and wild,

p. 231
Trembled for terror, as a frail
Young plantain shivers in the gale.When Ráma saw Virádha claspFair Sítá in his mighty grasp,Thus with pale lips that terror driedThe hero to his brother cried:'O see Virádha's arm enfoldMy darling in its cursed hold,--The child of Janak best of kings,My spouse whose soul to virtue clings,Sweet princess, with pure glory bright,Nursed in the lap of soft delight.Now falls the blow Kaikeyí meant,Successful in her dark intent:This day her cruel soul will beTriumphant over thee and me.Though Bharat on the throne is set,Her greedy eyes look farther yet:Me from my home she dared expel,Me whom all creatures loved so well.This fatal day at length, I ween,Brings triumph to the younger queen.I see with bitterest grief and shameAnother touch the Maithil dame.Not loss of sire and royal powerSo grieves me as this mournful hour.'

Thus in his anguish cried the chief:
Then drowned in tears, o'erwhelmed by grief,Thus Lakshman in his anger spake,Quick panting like a spell-bound snake:
'Canst thou, my brother, Indra's peer,
When I thy minister am near.Thus grieve like some forsaken thing,Thou, every creature's lord and king?My vengeful shaft the fiend shall slay,And earth shall drink his blood to-day.The fury which my soul at firstUpon usurping Bharat nursed,On this Virádha will I wreakAs Indra splits the mountain peak.Winged by this arm's impetuous might   My shaft with deadly forceThe monster in the chest shall smite,   And fell his shattered corse.'
        * * * * *
Next: Canto III.: Virádha Attacked.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO III.: VIRÁDHA ATTACKED.
Virádha with a fearful shout
That echoed through the wood, cried out:
'What men are ye, I bid you say,
And whither would ye bend your way?'
To him whose mouth shot fiery flame
The hero told his race and name:'Two Warriors, nobly bred, are we,And through this wood we wander free.But who art thou, how born and styled,Who roamest here in Dandak's wild?'
To Ráma, bravest of the brave,
His answer thus Virádha gave:'Hear, Raghu's son, and mark me well,And I my name and race will tell.Of S'atahradá born, I springFrom Java as my sire, O King:Me, of this lofty lineage, allGiants on earth Virádha call.The rites austere I long maintainedFrom Brahmá's grace the boon have gained

To bear a charmed frame which ne'er
Weapon or shaft may pierce or tear.Go as ye came, untouched by fear,And leave with me this woman here;Go, swiftly from my presence fly,Or by this hand ye both shall die.'
Then Ráma with his fierce eyes red
With fury to the giant said:'Woe to thee, sinner, fond and weak,Who madly thus thy death wilt seek!Stand, for it waits thee in the fray:With life thou ne'er shalt flee away.'
He spoke, and raised the cord whereon
A pointed arrow flashed and shone,Then, wild with anger, from his bow,He launched the weapon on the foe.Seven times the fatal cord he drew,And forth seven rapid arrows flew,Shafts winged with gold that left the windAnd e'en Suparna's  
1 self behind.
Full on the giant's breast they smote,And purpled like the peacock's throat,Passed through his mighty bulk and cameTo earth again like flakes of flame.The fiend the Maithil dame unclasped;In his fierce hand his spear he grasped,And wild with rage, pierced through and through,

At Ráma and his brother flew.
So loud the roar which chilled with fear,So massy was the monster's spear,He seemed, like Indra's flagstaff, dreadAs the dark God who rules the dead.On huge Virádha fierce as He  
2
Who smites, and worlds have ceased to be,The princely brothers poured amainTheir fiery flood of arrowy rain.Unmoved he stood, and opening wideHis dire mouth laughed unterrified,And ever as the monster gapedThose arrows from his jaws escaped.Preserving still his life unharmed,By Brahmá's saving promise charmed,His mighty spear aloft in airHe raised, and rushed upon the pair.From Ráma's bow two arrows flewAnd cleft that massive spear in two,
p. 232
Dire as the flaming levin sentFrom out the cloudy firmament.Cut by the shafts he guided wellTo earth the giant's weapon fell:As when from Meru's summit, rivenBy fiery bolts, a rock is driven.Then swift his sword each warrior drew,

Like a dread serpent black of hue,
And gathering fury for the blowRushed fiercely on the giant foe.Around each prince an arm he cast,And held the dauntless heroes fast:Then, though his gashes gaped and bled,Bearing the twain he turned and fled.
Then Ráma saw the giant's plan,
And to his brother thus began:'O Lakshman, let Virádha stillHurry us onward as he will,For look, Sumitra's son, he goesAlong the path we freely chose.'
He spoke: the rover of the night
Upraised them with terrific might,Till, to his lofty shoulders swung,Like children to his neck they clung.Then sending far his fearful roar,The princes through the wood he bore,--A wood like some vast cloud to view,Where birds of every plumage flew,And mighty trees o'erarching threw   Dark shadows on the ground;Where snakes and silvan creates madeTheir dwelling, and the jackal strayed   Through tangled brakes around.

Footnotes
231:1 The King of birds.
231:2 Kálántakayamopamam, resembling Yama the 
destroyer.
Next: Canto IV.: Virádha's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IV.: VIRÁDHA'S DEATH.
But Sítá viewed with wild affright
The heroes hurried from her sight.She tossed her shapely arms on high,And shrieked aloud her bitter cry:'Ah, the dread giant bears awayThe princely Ráma as his prey,Truthful and pure, and good and great,And Lakshman shares his brother's fate.The brindled tiger and the bearMy mangled limbs for food will tear.Take me, O best of giants, me,And leave the sons of Raghu free.'
Then, by avenging fury spurred,
Her mournful cry the heroes heard,And hastened, for the lady's sake,The wicked monster's life to take.Then Lakshman with resistless strokeThe foe's left arm that held him broke,And Rama too, as swift to smite,Smashed with his heavy hand the right.With broken arms and tortured frameTo earth the fainting giant came,Like a huge cloud, or mighty rock

Bent, sundered by the levin's shock.
Then rushed they on, and crushed and bentTheir foe with arms and fists and feet,And nerved each mighty limb to poundAnd bray him on the level ground.Keen arrows and each biting bladeWide rents in breast and side had made;But crushed and torn and mangled, stillThe monster lived they could not kill.When Ráma saw no arms might slayThe fiend who like a mountain lay,The glorious hero, swift to saveIn danger, thus his counsel gave:' O Prince of men, his charmed lifeNo arms may take in battle strife:Now dig we in this grove a pitHis elephantine bulk to fit,And let the hollowed earth enfoldThe monster of gigantic mould.'
This said, the son of Raghu pressed
His foot upon the giant's breast.With joy the prostrate monster heardVictorious Ráma's welcome word,And straight Kakutstha's son, the bestOf men, in words like these addressed:'I yield, O chieftain, overthrownBy might that vies with Indra's own.Till now my folly-blinded eyes

Thee, hero, failed to recognize.
Happy Kaus'alyá! blest to beThe mother of a son like thee!I know thee well, O chieftain, now:Ráma, the prince of men, art thou.There stands the high-born Maithil dame,There Lakshman, lord of mighty fame.My name was Tumburu  
1, for song
Renowned among the minstrel throng:Cursed by Kuvera's stern decreeI wear the hideous shape you see.But when I sued, his grace to crave,The glorious God this answer gave:'When Ráma, Das'aratha's son,Destroys thee and the light is won,Thy proper shape once more assume,And heaven again shall give thee room.'When thus the angry God replied,No prayers could turn his wrath aside,And thus on me his fury fellFor loving Rambhá's  
2 charms too well.
Now through thy favour am I freedFrom the stern fate the God decreed,And saved, O tamer of the foe,
p. 233
By thee, to heaven again shall go.A league, O Prince, beyond this spot

Stands holy S'arabhanga's cot:
The very sun is not more brightThan that most glorious anchorite:To him, O Ráma, quickly turn,And blessings from the hermit earn.First under earth my body throw,Then on thy way rejoicing go.Such is the law ordained of oldFor giants when their days are told:Their bodies laid in earth, they riseTo homes eternal in the skies.'   Thus, by the rankling dart oppressed,Kakutstha's offspring he addressed:In earth his mighty body lay,His spirit fled to heaven away.   Thus spake Virádha ere he died;And Ráma to his brother cried:'Now dig we in this grove a pitHis elephantine bulk to fit.And let the hollowed earth enfoldThis mighty giant fierce and bold.'   This said, the valiant hero putUpon the giant's neck his foot.His spade obedient Lakshman plied,And dug a pit both deep and wideBy lofty souled Virádha's side.Then Raghu's son his foot withdrew,And down the mighty form they threw;One awful shout of joy he gave

And sank into the open grave.
The heroes, to their purpose true,In fight the cruel demon slew,   And radiant with delightDeep in the hollowed earth they castThe monster roaring to the last,   In their resistless might.Thus when they saw the warrior's steelNo life-destroying blow might deal,   The pair, for lore renowned,Deep in the pit their hands had madeThe unresisting giant laid,   And killed him neath the ground.Upon himself the monster broughtFrom Ráma's hand the death he sought   With strong desire to gain:And thus the rover of the nightTold Ráma, as they strove in fight,That swords might rend and arrows smite   Upon his breast in vain.Thus Ráma, when his speech he heard,The giant's mighty form interred,   Which mortal arms defied.With thundering crash the giant fell,And rock and cave and forest dell   With echoing roar replied.The princes, when their task was doneAnd freedom from the peril won,   Rejoiced to see him die.

Then in the boundless wood they strayed,
Like the great sun and moon displayed
   Triumphant in the sky. 1
        * * * * *
Footnotes
232:1 Somewhat inconsistently with this part of the 
story Tumburu is mentioned in Book II, Canto XII as 
one of the Gandharvas or heavenly minstrels summoned to perform at Bharadvája's feast.
232:2 Rambhá appears in Book I, Canto LXIV as the 
temptress of Visvámitra.
Next: Canto V.: S'arabhanga.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO V.: S'ARABHANGA.
Then Ráma, having slain in fight
Virádha of terrific might,With gentle words his spouse consoled,And clasped her in his loving hold.Then to his brother nobly braveThe valiant prince his counsel gave:'Wild are these woods around us spread;And hard and rough the ground to tread:We, O my brother, ne'er nave viewedSo dark and drear a solitude:To S'arabhanga let us haste,Whom wealth of holy works has graced.'   Thus Ráma spoke, and took the roadTo S'arabhanga's pure abode.But near that saint whose lustre viedWith Gods, by penance purified,With startled eyes the prince beheldA wondrous sight unparalleled.In splendour like the fire and sunHe saw a great and glorious one.Upon a noble car he rode,And many a God behind him glowed:And earth beneath his feet unpressed  
2
The monarch of the skies confessed.

Ablaze with gems, no dust might dim
The bright attire that covered him.Arrayed like him, on every sideHigh saints their master glorified.Near, borne in air, appeared in viewHis car which tawny coursers drew,Like silver cloud, the moon, or sunEre yet the day is well begun.Wreathed with gay garlands, o'er his headA pure white canopy was spread,And lovely nymphs stood nigh to holdFair chouris with their sticks of gold,Which, waving in each gentle hand,The forehead of their monarch fanned.God, saint, and bard, a radiant ring,5ang glory to their heavenly King:Forth into joyful lauds they burstAs Indra with the sage conversed.Then Ráma, when his wondering eyesBeheld the monarch of the skies,
p. 234
To Lakshman quickly called, and showedThe car wherein Lord Indra rode:'See, brother, see that air-borne car,Whose wondrous glory shines afar:Wherefrom so bright a lustre streamsThat like a falling sun it seems

These are the steeds whose fame we know,
Of heavenly race through heaven they go:These are the steeds who bear the yokeOf S'akra,  
1 Him whom all invoke.
Behold these youths, a glorious band,Toward every wind a hundred stand:A sword in each right hand is borne,And rings of gold their arms adorn.What might in every broad deep chestAnd club-like arm is manifest!Clothed in attire of crimson hueThey show like tigers fierce to view.Great chains of gold each warder deck,Gleaming like fire beneath his neck.The age of each fair youth appearsSome score and five of human years:The ever-blooming prime which theyWho live in heaven retain for aye:Such mien these lordly beings wear,Heroic youths, most bright and fair.Now, brother, in this spot, I pray,With the Videhan lady stay,Till I have certain knowledge whoThis being is, so bright to view.'   He spoke, and turning from the spotSought S'arabhanga's hermit cot.But when the lord of S'achí  
2 saw
The son of Raghu near him draw,He hastened of the sage to take

His leave, and to his followers spake:
   'See, Ráma bends his steps this way,But ere he yet a word can say,Come, fly to our celestial sphere;It is not meet he see me here.Soon victor and triumphant heIn fitter time shall look on me.Before him still a great emprise,A task too hard for others, lies.'   Then with all marks of honour highThe Thunderer bade the saint good-bye,And in his car which coursers drewAway to heaven the conqueror flew.Then Ráma, Lakshman, and the dame,To S'arabhanga nearer came,Who sat beside the holy flame.Before the ancient sage they bent,And clasped his feet most reverent;Then at his invitation foundA seat beside him on the ground.Then Ráma prayed the sage would deignLord Indra's visit to explain;
And thus at length the holy man
In answer to his prayer began:   'This Lord of boons has sought me hereTo waft me hence to Brahmá's sphere,Won by my penance long and stern,--A home the lawless ne'er can earn.

But when I knew that thou wast nigh,
To Brahmá's world I could not flyUntil these longing eyes were blestWith seeing thee, mine honoured guest.Since thou, O Prince, hast cheered my sight,Great-hearted lover of the right,To heavenly spheres will I repairAnd bliss supreme that waits me there.For I have won, dear Prince, my wayTo those fair worlds which ne'er decay,Celestial seat of Brahmá's reign:Be thine, with me, those worlds to gain.'   Then master, of all sacred lore,Spake Ráma to the saint once more:   'I, even I, illustrious sage,Will make those worlds mine heritage:But now, I pray, some home assignWithin this holy grove of thine.'   Thus Ráma, Indra's peer in might,Addressed the aged anchorite:And he, with wisdom well endued,To Raghu's son his speech renewed:   'Sutíkshna's woodland home is near,A glorious saint of life austere,True to the path of duty; heWith highest bliss will prosper thee.Against the stream thy course must beOf this fair brook Mandákiní,Whereon light rafts like blossoms glide;

Then to his cottage turn aside.
There lies thy path: but ere thou go,Look on me, dear one, till I throwAside this mould that girds me in,As casts the snake his withered skin.'   He spoke, the fire in order laidWith holy oil due offerings made,And S'arábhanga, glorious sire,Laid down his body in the fire.Then rose the flame above his head,On skin, blood, flesh, and bones it fed,Till forth, transformed, with radiant hueOf tender youth, he rose anew,Far-shining in his bright attireCame S'arábhanga from the pyre:Above the home of saints, and thoseWho feed the quenchless flame,  
1b he rose:
Beyond the seat of Gods he passed,And Brahmá's sphere was gained at last.
p. 235
The noblest of the twice-born race,For holy works supreme in place,The Mighty Father there beheldGirt round by hosts unparalleled;And Brahmá joying at the sightWelcomed the glorious anchorite.

        * * * * *
Footnotes
233:1 The conclusion of this Canto is all a vain 
repetition: it is manifestly spurious and a very feeble 
imitation of Válmíki's style. See Additional Notes.
233:2 'Even when he had alighted,' says the 
commentator: The feet of Gods do not touch the ground.
234:1 A name of Indra
234:2 S'achí is the consort of lndra.
234:1b The spheres or mansions gained by those who have duly performed the sacrifices required of them. 
Different situations are assigned to these spheres, some placing them near the sun, others near the moon.
Next: Canto VI.: Ráma's Promise.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VI.: RÁMA'S PROMISE.
When he his heavenly home had found,
The holy men who dwelt aroundTo Ráma flocked, whose martial fameShone glorious as the kindled flame:Vaikhánasas  
1 who love the wild.
Pure hermits Bálakhilyas  2 styled,
Good Samprakshálas,  3 saints who live
On rays which moon and daystar give:Those who with leaves their lives sustainAnd those who pound with stones their grain:And they who lie in pools, and thoseWhose corn, save teeth, no winnow knows:Those who for beds the cold earth use,And those who every couch refuse:And those condemned to ceaseless pains,Whose single foot their weight sustains:And those who sleep neath open skies,Whose food the wave or air supplies,And hermits pure who spend their nightsOn ground prepared for sacred rites;Those who on hills their vigil hold,Or dripping clothes around them fold:The devotees who live for prayer,

Or the five fires  4 unflinching bear.
On contemplation all intent,
With light that heavenly knowledge lent,They came to Ráma, saint and sage,In S'arabhaga's hermitage.The hermit crowd around him pressed,And thus the virtuous chief addressed:'The lordship of the earth is thine,O Prince of old Ikshváku's line.
Lord of the Gods is Indra, so
Thou art our lord and guide below.Thy name, the glory of thy might,Throughout the triple world are bright:Thy filial love so nobly shown.Thy truth and virtue well are known.To thee, O lord, for help we fly,And on thy love of right rely:With kindly patience hear us speak,And grant the boon we humbly seek.That lord of earth were most unjust,Foul traitor to his solemn trust,Who should a sixth of all  
1b require,
Nor guard his people like a sire.But he who ever watchful strivesTo guard his subjects' wealth and lives,Dear as himself or, dearer still,His sons, with earnest heart and will,--That king, O Raghu's son, secures

High fame that endless years endures,
And he to Brahmá's world shall rise,Made glorious in the eternal skies,Whate'er, by duty won, the meedOf saints whom roots and berries feed,One fourth thereof, for tender careOf subjects, is the monarch's share.These, mostly of the Bráhman race,Who make the wood their dwelling-place,Although a friend in thee they view,Fall friendless neath the giant crew.Come, Ráma, come, and see hard byThe holy hermits' corpses lie,Where many a tangled pathway showsThe murderous work of cruel foes.These wicked fiends the hermits kill--Who live on Chitrakúta's hill,And blood of slaughtered saints has dyedMandákiní and Pampá's side.No longer can we bear to seeThe death of saint and devoteeWhom through the forest day by dayThese Rákshases unpitying slay.To thee, O Prince, we flee, and craveThy guardian help our lives to save.From these fierce rovers of the nightDefend each stricken anchorite.Throughout the world 'twere vain to seekAn arm like thine to aid the weak.

O Prince, we pray thee hear our call,
And from these fiends preserve us all.'   The son of Raghu heard the plaintOf penance-loving sage and saint,And the good prince his speech renewedTo all the hermit multitude:   'To me, O saints, ye need not sue:I wait the hests of all of you.I by mine own occasion ledThis mighty forest needs must tread,
p. 236
And while I keep my sire's decreeYour lives from threatening foes will free.I hither came of free accordTo lend the aid by you implored,And richest meed my toil shall pay,While here in forest shades I stay.I long in battle strife to close.And slay these fiends, the hermits' foes,That saint and sage may learn arightMy prowess and my brother's might.'   Thus to'the saints his promise gaveThat prince who still to virtue clave   With never-wandering thought:And then with Lakshman by his side,With penance-wealthy men to guide,   Sutíkshna's home he sought.

Footnotes
235:1 Hermits who live upon roots which they dig out 
of the earth: literally diggers, derived from the prefix vi 
and khan to dig.
235:2 Generally, divine personages of the height of a 
man's thumb, produced from Brahmá's hair: here, 
according to the commentator followed by Gorresio, hermits who when they have obtained fresh food throw away what they had laid up before.
235:3 Sprung from the washings of Vishnu's feet.
235:4 Four fires burning round them, and the sun above.
235:1b The tax allowed to the king by the Laws of 
Manu.
Next: Canto VII.: Sutíkshna.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VII.: SUTÍKSHNA.
So Raghu's son, his foemen's dread,
With Sítá and his brother sped,Girt round by many a twice-born sage,To good Sutikshna's hermitage.  
1
Through woods for many a league he passed,O'er rushing rivers full and fast,Until a mountain fair and brightAs lofty Meru rose in sight.Within its belt of varied woodIkshváku'a sons and Sítá stood,Where trees of every foliage boreBlossom and fruit in endless store.There coats of bark, like garlands strung,Before a lonely cottage hung,And there a hermit, dust-besmeared,A lotus on his breast, appeared.Then Ráma with obeisance dueAddressed the sage, as near he drew:'My name is Ráma, lord; I seekThy presence, saint, with thee to speak.O sage, whose merits ne'er decay,Some word unto thy servant say.'   The sage his eyes on Ráma bent,Of virtue's friends preëminent;

Then words like these he spoke, and pressed
The son of Raghu to his breast:'Welcome to thee, illustrious youth,Best champion of the rights of truth!By thine approach this holy groundA worthy lord this day has found.I could not quit this mortal frameTill thou shouldst, come, O dear to fame:To heavenly spheres I would not rise,Expecting thee with eager eyes.
I knew that thou, unkinged, hadst made
Thy home in Chitrakúta's shade.E'en now, O Ráma, Indra, lordSupreme by all the Gods adored,King of the Hundred Offerings,  
1b said,
When he my dwelling visited,That the good works that I have doneMy choice of all the worlds have won.Accept this meed of holy vows,And with thy brother and thy spouse,Roam, through my favour, in the skyWhich saints celestial glorify.'   To that bright sage, of penance stern,The high-souled Ráma spake in turn,As Vásava  
2b who rules the skies
To Brahmá's gracious speech replies:I of myself those worlds will win,O mighty hermit pure from sin:

But now, O saint, I pray thee tell
Where I within this wood may dwell:For I by S'arabhanga old,The son of Gautama, was toldThat thou in every lore art wise,And seest all with loving eyes.'   Thus to the saint, whose glories highFilled all the world, he made reply:And thus again the holy manHis pleasant speech with joy began:'This calm retreat, O Prince, is blestWith many a charm: here take thy rest.Here roots and kindly fruits abound,And hermits love the holy ground.Fair silvan beasts and gentle deerIn herds unnumbered wander here:And as they roam, secure from harm,Our eyes with grace and beauty charm:Except the beasts in thickets bred,This grove of ours has naught to dread."   The hermit's speech when Ráma heard,--The hero ne'er by terror stirred,--On his great bow his hand he laid,And thus in turn his answer made:'O saint, my darts of keenest steel,Armed with their murderous barbs, would dealDestruction mid the silvan raceThat flocks around thy dwelling-place.Most wretched then my fate would be

For such dishonour shown to thee:
And only for the briefest stayWould I within this grove delay.'   He spoke and ceased. With pious careHe turned him to his evening prayer,Performed each customary rite,And sought his lodging for the night,With Sítá and his brother laid
p. 237
Beneath the grove's delightful shade,First good Sútíkshnu, when he sawThe shades of night around them draw,   With hospitable careThe princely chieftains entertainedWith store of choicest food ordained   For holy hermit's fare.
Footnotes
236:1 Near the celebrated Rámagiri or Ráma's Hill, now 
Rám-tek, near Nagpore --the scene of the Yaksha's exile 
in the Messenger Cloud.
236:1b A hundred As'vamedhas or sacrifices of a horse 

raise the sacrificer to the dignity of Indra.
236:2b Indra.
Next: Canto VIII.: The Hermitage.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VIII.: THE HERMITAGE.
So Ráma and Sumttrá's son,
When every honour due was done,Slept through the night. When morning   broke,The heroes from their rest awoke.Betimes the son of Raghu rose,With gentle Sítá, from repose,And sipped the cool delicious waveSweet with the scent the lotus gave,Then to the Gods and sacred flameThe heroes and the lady came,And bent their heads in honour meetWithin the hermit's pure retreat.When every stain was purged away,They saw the rising Lord of Day:Then to Sutíkhna's side they went,And softly spoke, most reverent:   'Well have we slept, O holy lord,Honoured of thee by all adored:Now leave to journey forth we pray:These hermits urge us on our way.We haste to visit, wandering by,The ascetics' homes that round you lie,And roaming Dandak's mighty wood

To view each saintly brotherhood,
For thy permission now we sue,With these high saints to duty true,By penance taught each sense to tame,--In lustre like the smokeless flame.Ere on our brows the sun can beatWith fierce intolerable heat.Like some unworthy lord who winsHis power by tyranny and sins,O saint, we fain would part.' The threeBent humbly to the dovotee.He raised the princes as they pressedHis feet, and strained them to his breast;And then the chief of devoteesBespake them both in words like these.'Go with thy brother, Ráma, go,Pursue thy path untouched by woe:Go with thy faithful Sítá, sheStill like a shadow follows theeRoam Dandak wood observing wellThe pleasant homes where hermits dwell,--Pure saints whose ordered souls adhereTo penance rites and vows austere.
There plenteous roots and berries grow,
And noble trees their blossoms show,And gentle deer and birds of airIn peaceful troops are gathered there.There see the full-blown lotus stud

The bosom of the lucid flood,
And watch the joyous mallard shakeThe reeds that fringe the pool and lake.See with delighted eye the rillLeap sparkling from her parent hill,And hear the woods that round thee lieReëcho to the peacock's cry.And as I bid thy brother, so,Sumitrá's child, I bid thee go.Go forth, these varied beauties see,And then once more return to me.'   Thus spake the sage Sutikshna: bothThe chiefs assented, nothing loth.Round him with circling steps they paced,Then for the road prepared with haste.Tnere Sítá stood, the dame long-eyed,Fair quivers round their waists she tied,And gave each prince his trusty bow,And sword which ne*er a spot might know.Each took his quiver from her *and.And clanging bow and gleaming brand:Then from the hermits' home the twoWent forth each woodland scene to view.Eavh beauteous in the bloom of age,Dismissed by that illustrious sage,With bow and sword accoutred, hiedAway, and Sítá by their side.

Next: Canto IX.: Sita's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IX.: SITA'S SPEECH.
Blest by the sage, when Raghu's son
His onward journey had begun,Thus in her soft tone Sítá, meekWith modest fear, began to speak:'One little slip the great may leadTo shame that follows lawless deed:Such shame, my lord, as still must clingTo faults from low desire that spring.Three several sins defile the soul,Born of desire that spurns control:First, utterance of a lying word,Then, viler both, the next, and third:The lawless love of other's wife,The thirst of blood uncaused by strife.The first, O Ragnu's son, in theeNone yet has found, none e'er shall see.Love of another's dame destroysAll merit, lost for guilty joys:Ráma, such crime in thee, I ween,Has ne'er been found, shall ne'er be seen:The very thought, my princely lord,Is in thy secret soul abhorred.
p. 238

For thou hast ever been the same
Fond lover of thine own dear dame,Content with faithful heart to doThy father's will, most just and true:Justice, and faith, and many a graceIn thee have found a resting-place.Such virtues, Prince, the good may gainWho empire o'er each sense retain;And well canst thou, with loving viewRegarding all, each sense subdue,But for the third, the lust that strives,Insatiate still, for others' lives,--Fond thirst of blood where hate is none,--This, O my lord, thou wilt not shun.Thou hast but now a promise made,The saints of Danndak wood to aid:And to protect their lives from illThe giants' blood in tight wilt spill:And from thy promise lasting fameWill glorify the forest's name.Armed with thy bow and arrows thouForth with thy brother journeyest nowWhile as I think how true thou artFears for thy bliss assail my heart,And all my spirit at the sightIs troubled with a strange affright.I like it not--it seems not good--Thy going thus to Damdak wood:

And I, if thou wilt mark me well,
The reason of my fear will tell.Thou with thy brother, bow in hand,Beneath those ancient trees wilt stand,And thy keen arrows will not spareWood-rovers who will meet thee there.For as the fuel food suppliesThat bids the dormant flame arise,Thus when the warrior grasps his bowHe feels his breast with ardour glow.Deep in a holy grove, of yore,Where bird and beast from strife forbore,S'achi beneath the sheltering boughs,A truthful hermit kept his vows.Then Indra, S'achi's heavenly lord,Armed like a warrior with a sword,Came to his tranquil home to spoilThe hermit of his holy toil,And left the glorious weapon thereEntrusted to the hermit's care,A pledge for him to keep, whose mindTo fervent zeal was all resigned.He took the brand: with utmost heedHe kept it for the warrior's need:To keep his trust he fondly stroveWhen roaming in the neighbouring grove:Whene'er for roots and fruit he strayedStill by his side he bore the blade:Still on his sacred charge intent,

He took his treasure when he went.
As day by day that brand he wore,The hermit, rich in merit's storeFrom penance rites each thought withdrew,And fierce and wild his spirit grew.With heedless soul he spurned the right,And found in cruel deeds delight.So, living with the sword, he fell,A ruined hermit, down to hell.This tale applies to those who dealToo closely with the warrior's steel:The steel to warriors is the sameAs fuel to the smouldering flame.Sincere affection prompts my speech:I honour where I fain would teach.Mayst thou, thus armed with shaft and bow,So dire a longing never knowAs, when no hatred prompts the fray,These giants of the wood to slay:For he who kills without offenceShall win but little glory thenceThe bow the warrior joys to bendIs lent him for a nobler end,That he may save and succour thoseWho watch in woods when pressed by foes.What, matched with woods, is bow or steel?What, warrior's arm with hermit's zeal?We with such might have naught to do:The forest rule should guide us too.

But when Ayodhyá hails thee lord,
Be then thy warrior life restored:So shall thy sire  
1 and mother joy
In bliss that naught may e'er destroy.And if, resigning empire, thouSubmit thee to the hermit's vow,The noblest gain from virtue springs,And virtue joy unending brings.All earthly blessings virtue sends:On virtue all the world depends.Those who with vow and fasting tameTo due restraint the mind and frame,Win by their labour, nobly wise,The highest virtue for their prize.Pure in the hermit's grove remain,True to thy duty, free from stain.But the three worlds are open thrownTo thee, by whom all things are known.Who gave me power that I should dareHis duty to my lord declare?'Tis woman's fancy, light as air,   That moves my foolish breast.Now with thy brother counsel take,Reflect, thy choice with judgment make,   And do what seems the best.'
p. 239

Footnotes
238:1 Gorresio observes that Das'aratha was dead and 
that Sitá had been informed of his death. In his 
translation he substitutes for the words of the text 'thy relations and mine.' This is quite superfluous. Das'aratha though in heaven still took a loving interest in the fortunes of his son.
Next: Canto X.: Ráma's Reply.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO X.: RÁMA'S REPLY.
The words that Sítá uttered, spurred
By truest love, the hero heard:Then he who ne'er from virtue strayedTo Janak's child his answer made:'In thy wise speech, sweet love, I findTrue impress of thy gentle mind,Well skilled the warrior's path to trace,Thou pride of Janak's ancient race.What fitting answer shall I frameTo thy good words, my honoured dame?Thou sayst the warrior bears the bowThat misery's tears may cease to flow;And those pure saints who love the shadeOf Dandak wood are sore dismayed.They sought me of their own accord,With suppliant prayers my aid implored:They, fed on roots and fruit, who spendTheir lives where bosky wilds extend,My timid love, enjoy no restBy these malignant fiends distressed.These make the flesh of man their meat:The helpless saints they kill and eat.The hermits sought my side, the chiefOf Brahman race declared their grief.

I heard, and from my lips there fell
The words which thou rememberest well:I listened as the hermits cried,And to their prayers I thus replied:   'Your favour, gracious lords, I claim,O'erwhelmed with this enormous shameThat Bráhmans, great and pure as you,Who should be sought, to me should sue.'And then before the saintly crowd,'What can I do?' I cried aloud.Then from the trembling hermits brokeOne long sad cry, and thus they spoke:'Fiends of the wood, who wear at willEach varied shape, afflict us still.To thee in our distress we fly:O help us, Ráma, or we die.When sacred rites of fire are due,When changing moons are full or new,These fiends who bleeding flesh devourAssail us with resistless power.They with their cruel might tormentThe hermits on their vows intent:We look around for help and seeOur surest refuge, Prince, in thee.We, armed with powers of penance, mightDestroy the rovers of the night:But loth were we to bring to naughtThe merit years of toil have bought.Our penance rites are grown too hard,

By many a check and trouble barred,
But though our saints for food are slainThe withering curse we yet restrain.
Thus many a weary day distressed
By giants who this wood infest,We see at length deliverance, thouWith Lakshman art our guardian now.'   As thus the troubled hermits prayed,I promised, dame, my ready aid,And now--for truth I hold most dear--Still to my word must I adhere.My love, I might endure to beDeprived of Lakshman, life, and thee,But ne'er deny my promise, ne'erTo Bráhmans break the oath I sware.I must, enforced by high constraint,Protect them all. Each suffering saintIn me, unasked, his help had found;Still more in one by promise bound.I know thy words, mine own dear dame,From thy sweet heart's affection came:I thank thee for thy gentle speech,For those we love are those we teach.'Tis like thyself, O fair of face,'Tis worthy of thy noble race:Dearer than life, thy feet are setIn righteous paths they ne'er forget.'   Thus to the Maithil monarch's child,

His own dear wife, in accents mild
   The high-souled hero said:Then to the holy groves which layBeyond them fair to see, their way   The bow-armed chieftain led.
Next: Canto XI.: Agastya.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XI.: AGASTYA.
Ráma went foremost of the three,
Next Sítá, followed, fair to see,And Lakshman with his bow in handWalked hindmost of the little band.As onward through the wood they went,With great delight their eyes were bentOn rocky heights beside the wayAnd lofty trees with blossoms gay;And streamlets running fair and fastThe royal youths with Sítá passed.They watched the sáras and the drakeOn islets of the stream and lake,And gazed delighted on the floodsBright with gay birds and lotus buds.They saw in startled herds the roes,The passion-frenzied buffaloes,Wild elephants who fiercely toreThe tender trees, and many a boar.A length of woodland way they passed,And when the sun was low at lastA lovely stream-fed lake they spied,Two leagues across from side to side.Tall elephants fresh beauty gaveTo grassy bank and lilied wave,

p. 240
By many a swan and sáras stirred,
Mallard, and gay-winged water-bird.From those sweet waters, loud and long,Though none was seen to wake the song,Swelled high the singer's music blentWith each melodious instrument.Ráma and car-borne Lakshman heardThe charming strain, with wonder stirred,Turned on the margent of the lakeTo Dharmabhait *  
1 the sage, and spake:
  'Our longing souls, O hermit, burnThis music of the lake to learn:We pray thee, noblest sage, explainThe cause of the mysterious strain.'He, as the son of Raghu prayed,With swift accord his answer made,And thus the hermit, virtuous-souled,The story of the fair lake told:  'Through every age 'tis known to fame,Panchápsaras  
2 its glorious name,
By holy Mándakarni wroughtWith power his rites austere had bought.For he, great votarist, intentOn strictest rule his stern life spent.Ten thousand years the stream his bed,Ten thousand years on air he fed.

Then on the blessed Gods who dwell
In heavenly homes great terror fell:They gathered all, by Agni led,And counselled thus disquieted:'The hermit by ascetic painThe seat of one of us would gain.'Thus with their hearts by fear oppressedIn full assembly spoke the Blest,And bade five loveliest nymphs, as fairAs lightning in the evening air,Armed with their winning wiles, seduceFrom his stern vows the great recluse.Though lore of earth and heaven he knew,The hermit from his task they drew,And made the great ascetic slaveTo conquering love, the Gods to save.Bach of the heavenly five became,Bound to the sage, his wedded dame;And he, for his beloved's sake,Formed a fair palace neath the lake.Under the flood the ladies live,To joy and ease their days they give,And lap in bliss the hermit wooedFrom penance rites to youth renewed.So when the sportive nymphs withinThose secret bowers their play begin,You hear the singers' dulcet tonesBlend sweetly with their tinkling zones.'    'How wondrous are these words of thine!'

Cried the famed chiefs of Raghu's line,
As thus they heard the sage unfold
The marvels of the tale he told.   As Ráma spake, his eyes were bentUpon a hermit settlementWith light of heavenly lore endued,With sacred grass and vesture strewed.His wife and brother by his side,Within the holy bounds he hied,And there, with honour entertainedBy all the saints, a while remained.In time, by due succession led,Each votary's cot he visited,And then the lord of martial lore,Returned where he had lodged before.Here for the months, content, he stayed,There for a year his visit paid:Here for four months his home would fix,There, as it chanced, for five or six.Here for eight months and there for threeThe son of Raghu's stay would be:Here weeks, there fortnights, more or less,He spent in tranquil happiness.As there the hero dwelt at easeAmong those holy devotees,In days untroubled o'er his headTen circling years of pleasure fled.So Raghu's son in duty trained

A while in every cot remained,
Then with his dame retraced the roadTo good Sutíkshna's calm abode.Hailed by the saints with honours dueNear to the hermit's home he drew,And there the tamer of his foesDwelt for a time in sweet repose.One day within that holy woodBy saint Sutíkstma Ráma stood,And thus the prince with reverence meekTo that high sage began to speak:   'In the wide woodlands that extendAround us, lord most reverend,As frequent voice of rumour tells,Agastya, saintliest hermit, dwells.So vast the wood, I cannot traceThe path to reach his dwelling place,Nor, searching unassisted, findThat hermit of the thoughtful mind.I with my wife and brother fainWould go, his favour to obtain,Would seek him in his lone retreatAnd the great saint with reverence greet.This one desire, O Master, longCherished within my heart, is strong,That I may pay of free accordMy duty to that hermit lord.'   As thus the prince whose heart was bentOn virtue told his firm intent,

The good Sutíkshna's joy rose high,
And thus in turn he made reply:The very thing, O Prince, which thouHast sought, I wished to urge but now,Bid thee with wife and brother see
p. 241
Agastya, glorious devotee.I count this thing an omen fairThat thou shouldst thus thy wish declare,And I, my Prince, will gladly teachThe way Agastya's home to reach.Southward, dear son, direct thy feetEight leagues beyond this still retreat:Agastya's hermit brother thereDwells in a home most bright and fair.'Tis on a knoll of woody ground,With many a branching Pippal  
1 crowned:
There sweet birds' voices ne'er are mute,And trees are gay with flower and fruit.There many a lake gleams bright and cool,And lilies deck each pleasant pool,While swan, and crane, and mallard's wingsAre lovely in the water-springs.There for one night, O Ráma, stay,And with the dawn pursue thy way.Still farther, bending southward, byThe thicket's edge the course must lie,

And thou wilt see, two leagues from thence
Agastya's lovely residence,Set in the woodland's fairest spot,All varied foliage decks the cot:There Si'ta', Lakshman thou, at easeMay spend sweet hours neath shady trees,For all of noblest growth are foundLuxuriant on that *bosky ground,If it be still thy firm intentTo see that saint pree*minent,O mighty counsellor, this dayDepart upon thine onward way.'   The hermit spake, and Ráma bentHis head, with Lakshman, reverent,And then with him and Janak's childSet out to trace the forest wild.He saw dark woods that fringed the road,And distant hills like clouds that showed,And, as the way he followed, metWith many a lake and rivulet.So passing on with ease where ledThe path Sutikshna bade him tread,The hero with exulting breastHis brother in these words addressed:   'Here, surely, is the home, in sight,Of that illustrious anchorite:Here great Agastya's brother leadsA life intent on holy deeds.Warned of each guiding mark and sign,

I see them all herein combine:
I see the branches bending lowBeneath the flowers and fruit they show.A soft air from the forest springs,Fresh from the odorous grass, and bringsA spicy fragrance as it fleesO'er the ripe fruit of Pippal trees.See, here and there around us highPiled up in heaps cleft billets lie,
And holy grass is gathered, bright
As strips of shining lazulite.Full in the centre of the shadeThe hermits' holy fire is laid:I see its smoke the pure heaven streakDense as a big cloud's dusky peak.The twice-born men their steps retraceFrom each sequestered bathing place,And each his sacred gift has broughtOf blossoms which his hands have sought.Of all these signs, dear brother, eachAgrees with good Sutikshna's speech,And doubtless in this holy boundAgastya's brother will be found.Agastya once, the worlds who viewedWith love, a Deathlike fiend subdued,And armed with mighty power, obtainedBy holy works, this grove ordainedTo be a refuge and defence

From all oppressors' violence.
In days of yore within this placeTwo brothers fierce of demon race,Va'ta'pi* dire and Ilval, dwelt,And slaughter mid the Bra'hmans dealt.A Bra'hman's form, the fiend to cloak,Fierce Ilval wore, and Sanskrit spoke,And twice-born sages would inviteTo solemnize some funeral rite.His brother's flesh, concealed withinA ram's false shape and borrowed skin,--As men are wont at funeral feasts,--He dressed and fed those gathered priests.The holy men, unweeting ill,Took of the food and ate their fill.Then Ilval with a mighty shoutExclaimed 'Vatapi, issue out.'Soon as his brother's voice he heard,The fiend with ram-like bleating stirred:Bending in pieces every frame,Forth from the dying priests he came.So they who changed their forms at willThousands of Brahmans dared to kill,-Fierce fiends who loved each cruel deed,And joyed on bleeding flesh to feed.Agastya, mighty hermit, pressedTo funeral banquet like the rest,Obedient to the Gods' appealAte up the monster at a meal.

'Tis done,'tis done,' fierce Ilval cried,
And water for his hands supplied:Then lifting up his voice he spake:'Forth, brother, from thy prison break.'Then him who called the fiend, who longHad wrought the suffering Bra'hmans wrong,Thus thoughtful-souled Agastya, bestOf hermits, with a smile addresed:'How, Ra'kshas, is the fiend empoweredTo issue forth whom I devoured?Thy brother in a ram's disguise-Is gone where Yama's kingdom lies.'
p. 242
When from the words Agastya saidHe knew his brother fiend was dead,His soul on fire with vengeful rage,Rushed the night-rover at the sage.One lightning glance of fury, hotAs fire, the glorious hermit shot,As the fiend neared him in his stride,And straight, consumed to dust, he died.In pity for the Brahmans' plightAgastya wrought this deed of might:This grove which lakes and fair trees graceIn his great brother's dwelling place.   As Ráma thus the tale rehearsed,And with Sumitrá's son conversed,

The setting sun his last rays shed,
And evening o'er the land was spread.A while the princely brothers stayedAnd even rites in order paid,Then to the holy grove they drewAnd hailed the saint with honour due.With courtesy was Rama metBy that illustrious anchoret,And for one night he rested thereRegaled with fruit and hermit fare.But when the night had reached its close,And the sun's glorious circle rose,The son of Raghu left his bedAnd to the hermit's brother said:'Well rested in thy hermit cell,I stand, O saint, to bid farewell;For with thy leave I journey henceThy broher saint to reverence.''Go, Ráma go,' the sage replied:Then from the cot the chieftain hied.And while the pleasant grove he viewed,The path the hermit showed, pursued.Of every leaf, of changing hue.Plants, trees by hundreds round him grew,With joyous eyes he looked on all,Then Jak,  
1 the wild rice, and Sal; 2
He saw the red Hibiscus glow,He saw the flower-tipped creeper throwThe glory of her clusters o'er

Tall trees that loads of blossom bore.
Some, elephants had prostrate laid,In some the monkeys leapt and played,And through the whole wide forest rangThe charm of gay birds as they sang.Then Ráma of the lotus eyeTo Lakshman turned who followed nigh,And thus the hero youth impressedWith Fortune's favouring signs, addressed:   'How soft the leaves of every tree,How tame each bird and beast we see!Soon the fair home shall we beholdOf that great hermit tranquil-souled.The deed the good Agastya wrought
High fame throughout the world has bought:
I see, I see his calm retreatThat balms the pain of weary feet.Where white clouds rise from flames beneath,Where bark-coats lie with many a wreath,Where silvan things, made gentle, throng,And every bird is loud in song.With ruth for suffering creatures filled,A deathlike fiend with might he killed,And gave this southern realm to beA refuge, from oppression free.There stands his home, whose dreaded mightHas put the giant crew to flight,Who view with envious eyes afar

The peaceful shades they cannot mar.
Since that most holy saint has madeHis dwelling in this lovely shade,Checked by his might the giant broodHave dwelt in peace with souls subdued.And all this southern realm, withinWhose bounds no fiend may entrance win,Now bears a name which naught may dim,Made glorious through the worlds by him.When Vindhya, best of hills, would stayThe journey of the Lord of Day,Obedient to the saint's behestHe bowed for aye his humbled crest.That hoary hermit, world-renownedFor holy deeds, within this groundHas set his pure and blessed home,Where gentle silvan creatures roam.Agastya, whom the worlds revere,Pure saint to whom the good are dear,To us his guests all grace will show,Enriched with blessings ere we go.I to this aim each thought will turn,The favour of the saint to earn,That here in comfort may be spentThe last years of our banishment.Here sanctities and high saints stand,Gods, minstrels of the heavenly band;Upon Agastya's will they wait,And serve him, pure and temperate.

The liar's tongue, the tyrant's mind
Within these bounds no home may find:No cheat, no sinner here can be:So holy and so good is he.Here birds and lords of serpent race,Spirits and Gods who haunt the place,Content with scanty fare remain,As merit's meed they strive to gain.Made perfect here, the paints supreme,On cars that mock the Day-God's gleam,--Their mortal bodies cast aside,--Sought heaven transformed and glorified,Here Gods to living things, who winTheir favour, pure from cruel sin,Give royal rule and many a good,
p. 243
Immortal life and spirithood. INow, Lakshman, we are near the place:Do thou precede a little space,And tell the mighty saint that IWith Sítá at my side am nigh,"
Footnotes

240:1 One of the hermits who had followed Ráma.
240:2 The lake of the five nymphs.
241:1 The holy fig-tree.
242:1 The bread-fruit tree, Artocarpus integri folia.
242:2 A fine timber tree, Shores robusta.
Next: Canto XII.: The Heavenly Bow.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XII.: THE HEAVENLY BOW.
He spoke: the younger prince obeyed:
Within the bounds his way he made,And thus addressed, whom first he met,A pupil of the anchoret:   'Brave Ráma, eldest born, who springs,From Das'aratha, hither bringsHis wife the lady Sítá: heWould fain the holy hermit see.Lakshman am I--if happy fameE'er to thine ears has brought the name--His younger brother, prompt to doHis will, devoted, fond, and true.We, through our royal sire's decree,To the dread woods were forced to flee.Tell the great Master, I entreat,Our earnest wish our lord to greet."   He spoke: the hermit rich in storeOf fervid zeal and sacred lore,Sought the pure shrine which held the fire,To bear his message to the sire.Soon as he reached the saint most brightIn sanctity's surpassing might,He cried, uplifting reverent hands:'Lord Ráma near thy cottage stands.'

Then spoke Agastya's pupil dear
The message for his lord to hear:'Ráma and Lakshman, chiefs who springFrom Das'aratha, glorious king,Thy hermitage e'en now have sought,And lady Sítá with them brought.The tamers of the foe are hereTo see thee, Master, and revere.'Tis thine thy further will to say:Deign to command, and we obey.'   When from his pupil's lips he knewThe presence of the princely two.And Sítá born to fortune high.The glorious hermit made reply:'Great joy at last is mine this dayThat Ráma hither finds his way,For long my soul has yearned to seeThe prince who comes to visit me.Go forth, go forth, and hither bringThe royal three with welcoming:Lead Ráma in and place him near:Why stands he not already here?'   Thus ordered by the hermit, who,Lord of his thought, all dutv knew.His reverent hands together laid.The pupil answered and obeyed.Forth from the place with speed he ran,
To Lakshman came and thus began:

'Where is he? let not Ráma wait,
But speed, the sage to venerate.'   Then with the pupil Lakshman wentAcross the hermit settlement,And showed him Ráma where he stoodWith Janak's daughter in the wood.The pupil then his message spakeWhich the kind hermit bade him take;Then led the honoured Ráma thenceAnd brought him in with reverence.As nigh the royal Ráma cameWith Lakshman and the Maithil dame,He viewed the herds of gentle deerRoaming the garden free from fear.As through the sacred grove he trodHe viewed the seat of many a God,Brahmá and Agni,  
1 Sun and Moon,
And His who sends each golden boon;  2
Here Vishnu's stood, there Bhaga's  3 shrine,
And there Mahendra's Lord divine;Here His who formed this earthly frame, 
4
His there from whom all beings came.  5
Váyu's, 6 and His who loves to hold
The great noose, Varim  7 mighty-souled:
Here was the Vasus' 8 shrine to see,
Here that of sacred Gáyatrí, 9
The king of serpents  10 here had place,
And he who rules the feathered race.  11

Here Kártikeya,  12 warrior lord,
And there was Justice' King adored.
Then with disciples girt aboutThe mighty saint himself came out:Through fierce devotion bright as flameBefore the rest the Master came:And then to Lakshman, fortune blest,Ráma these hasty words addressed:'Behold, Agastya's self draws near,The mighty saint, whom all revere:With spirit raised I meet my lordWith richest wealth of penance stored.'   The strong-armed hero spake, and ranForward to meet the sunbright man.Before him, as he came, he bentAnd clasped his feet most reverent,Then rearing up his stately heightStood suppliant by the anchorite,While Lakshman's strength and Sítá's graceStood by the pride of Raghu's race.
p. 244
The sage his arms round Rama threwAnd welcomed him with honours due,Asked, was all well, with question sweet.And bade the hero to a seat.With holy oil he fed the flame,He brought the gifts which strangers claim,

And kindly waiting on the three
With honours due to high degree,He gave with hospitable careA simple hermit's woodland fare.Then sat the reverend father, firstOf hermits, deep in duty versed.And thus to suppliant Ráma, bredIn all the lore of virtue, said:'Did the false hermit, Prince, neglectTo hail his guest with due respect,He must,--the doom the perjured meet,--His proper flesh hereafter eat.A car-borne king a lord who swaysThe earth, and virtue's law obeys,Worthy of highest honour, thouHast sought, dear guest, my cottage now.'He spoke: with fruit and hermit fare,With every bloom the branches bare,Agastya graceed his honoured guest,And thus with gentle words addressed:'Accept this mighty bow, divine.Whereon red gold and diamonds shine;'Twas by the Heavenly Artist plannedFor Vishnu's own almighty hand:This God-sent shaft of sunbright hue,Whose deadly flight is ever true,By Lord Mahendra given of yore:This quiver with its endless store.Keen arrows hurtling to their aim

Like kindled fires that flash and flame:
Accept, in golden sheath encased,This sword with hilt of rich gold graced.Armed, whilom, with this best of bowsLord Vishnu slew his demon foes,And mid the dwellers in the skiesWon brilliant glory for his prize.The bow, the quivers, shaft, and swordReceived from me, O glorious lord:These conquest to thine arm shall bring,As thunder to the thunder's King.'   The splendid hermit bade him takeThe noble weapons as he spake,And as the prince accepted eachIn words like these renewed his speech:
Footnotes
243:1 The God of fire.
243:2 Kuera, the God of riches.
243:3 The Sun.
243:4 Brahma, the creator.

243:5 Siva.
243:6 The Wind-God.
243:7 The God of the sea.
243:8 A class of demi-gods, eight in number.
243:9 The holiest text of the Vedas, deified.
243:10 Vásaki
243:11 Garnd *
243:12 The War-God.
Next: Canto XIII.: Agastya's Counsel.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIII.: AGASTYA'S COUNSEL.
'O Ráma, great delight I feel,
Pleased, Lakshman, with thy faithful zeal,That you within these shades I seeVith Sitá come to honour me.But wandering through the rough rude wild
Has wearied Janak'a gentle child:
With labours of the way oppressedThe Maithil lady Iongs for rest.Young, delicate, und soft, and fair,Such toils as these untrained to bear,Her wifely love the dame has ledThe forest's troubled ways to tread.Here, Ráma, see that naught annoyHer easy hours of tranquil joy:A glorious task has she assayed,To follow thee through woodland shade.Since first from Nature's hand she came,A woman's mood is still the same,When Fortune smiles, her love to show,And leave her lord in want and woe.No pity then her heart can feel,She arms her soul with warrior's steel,Swift as the storm or Feathered King,

Uncertain as the lightning's wing.
Not so thy spouse: her purer mindShrinks from the faults of womankind;Like chaste Arundhatí  
1 above,
A paragon of faithful love.Let these blest shades, dear Ráma, beA home for Lakshman, her, and thee.'With raised hands reverently meekHe heard the holy hermit speak,And humbly thus addressed the sireWhose glory shone like kindled fire:   'How blest am I, what thanks I oweThat our great Master deigns to showHis favour, that his heart can beContent with Lakshman, Sitá, me.Show me, I pray, some spot of groundWhere thick trees wave aud springs abound,That I may raise my hermit cellAnd there in tranquil pleasure dwell.'Then thus replied Agaatya, bestOf hermits, to the chief's request:When for a little he had bentHis thoughts, upon that prayer intent:   'Beloved son, four leagues awayIs Panchavati bright and gay:Thronged with its deer, most fair it looksWith berries, fruit, and water-brooks.There build thee with thy brother's aidA cottage in the quiet shade,

And faithful to thy sire's behest,
Obedient to the sentence, rest.For well, O sinless chieftain, wellI know thy tale, how all befell:Stern penance and the love I boreThy royal sire supply the lore.To me long rites and fervid zealThe wish that stirs thy heart reveal,And hence my guest I bade thee be,That this pure grove might shelter thee.
p. 245
So now, thereafter, thus I speak:The shades of Panchavatí seek;That tranquil spot is bright and fair,And Sítá will be happy there.Not far remote from here it lies,A grove to charm thy loving eyes,Godávarí's pure stream is nigh:There Sítá's days will sweetly fly.Pure, lovely, rich in many a charm,O hero of the mighty arm,'Tis gay with every plant and fruit,And throngs of gay buds never mute.Thou, true to virtue's path, hast mightTo screen each trusting anchorite,And wilt from thy new home defendThe hermits who on thee depend.

Now yonder, Prince, direct thine eyes
Where dense Madhúka  1 woods arise:
Pierce their dark shade, and issuing forthTurn to a fig-tree on the north:Then onward up a sloping meadFlanked by a hill the way will lead:There Panchavatí, ever gayWith ceaseless bloom, thy steps will stay,'   The hermit ceased: the princely twoWith seemly honours bade adieu:With reverential awe each youthBowed to the saint whose word was truth,And then, dismissed with Sítá, theyTo Panchavatí took their way.Thus when each royal prince had graspedHis warrior's mighty bow, and clasped   His quiver to his side,With watchful eyes along the roadThe glorious saint Agastya showed,Dauntless in fight the brothers strode,   And Sítá with them hied.
Footnotes
244:1 One of the Pleiades generally regarded as the 
model of wifely excellence.

Next: Canto XIV.: Jatáyus.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIV.: JATÁYUS.
Then as the son of Raghu made
His way to Panchavatí's shade,A mighty vulture he beheldOf size and strength unparalleled.The princes, when the bird they saw,Approached with reverence and awe,And as his giant form they eyed,'Tell who thou art,' in wonder cried.The bird, as though their hearts to gain,Addressed them thus in gentlest strain;'In me, dear sons, the friend beholdYour royal father loved of old.'   He spoke: nor long did Ráma waitHis sire's dear friend to venerate:
He bade the bird declare his name
And the high race of which he came.When Raghu's son had spoken, heDeclared his name and pedigree,His words prolonging to discloseHow all the things that be arose:   'List while I tell, O Raghu's son,The first-born Fathers, one by one,Great Lords of Life, whence all in earth

And all in heaven derive their birth.
First Kardam heads the glorious raceWhere Vikrit holds the second place,With S'esha, Sans'ray next in line,And Bahuputra's might divine.Then Sthánu and Maríchi came,Atri, and Kratu's forceful frame.Pulastya followed, next to himAngiras' name shall ne'er be dim.Prachetas, Pulah next, and thenDaksha, Vivasvat praised of men:Aríshtanemi next, and lastKas'yap in glory unsurpassed.From Daksha,--fame the tale has told--Three-score bright daughters sprang of old.Of these fair-waisted nymphs the greatLord Kas'yap sought and wedded eight,Aditi, Diti, Kálaká,Támrá, Danú, and Analá,And Krodhavasá swift to ire,And Manu  
1b glorious as her sire.
Then when the mighty Kas'yap criedDelighted to each tender bride:'Sons shalt thou bear, to rule the threeGreat worlds, in might resembling me,'
p. 246
Aditi, Diti, and Danú

Obeyed his will as consorts true,
And Kálaká; but all the restRefused to hear their lord's behest.First Aditi conceived, and she,Mother of thirty Gods and three,The Vasus and A'dityas bare,Kudras, and A'svins, heavenly pair.Of Diti sprang the Daityas: fameDelights to laud their ancient name.In days of yore their empire dreadO'er earth and woods and ocean spread.Danú was mother of a child,O hero, As'vagríva styled,And Narak next and Kálak cameOf Kálaká, celestial dame.Of Támrá, too, five daughters brightIn deathless glory sprang to light.Ennobling fame still keeps aliveThe titles of the lovely five:Immortal honour still she claimsFor Kraunchí, Bhasí, S'yení's names.And wills not that the world forgetS'ukí or Dhritaráshtrí yet.Then Kraunchí bare the crane and owl,And Bhásí tribes of water fowl:Vultures and hawks that race through airWith storm-fleet pinions S'yení bare.All swans and geese on mere and brookTheir birth from Dhritaráshtrí took,

And all the river-haunting brood
Of ducks, a countless multitude.From S'ukí Nalá sprang, who bareDame Vinatá surpassing fair.From fiery Krodhavas'á, tenBright daughters sprang, O King of men:Mrigí and Mrigamadá named,Hari and Bhadiamadá famed,S'árdúlí, S'vetá fair to see,Mátangi bright, and Surabhi,Surasá marked with each fair sign,And Kadrumá, all maids divine.Mrigí, O prince without a peer,Was mother of the herds of deer,The bear, the yak, the mountain roeTheir birth to Mrigamandá owe;And Bhadramadá joyed to beMother of fair Irávatí,Who bare Airávat,  
1 huge of mould,
Mid warders of the earth enrolled,From Harí lordly lions trace,With monkeys of the wild, their race.From the great dame S'árdúlí styledSprung pards, Lángúrs, 
2 and tigers wild.
Mátangi, Prince, gave birth to allMátangas, elephants strong and tall,
And S'vet'a bore the beasts who stand
One at each wind, earth's warder band.  
1b

Next Surabhí the Goddess bore
Two heavenly maids, O Prince, of yore,Gandharvi--dear *as fa??* is she--And her sweet sister Rohiní.With kine this daughter filled each mead,And bright Gandharví bore the steed.  
2b
Surasá bore the serpents:  3b all
The snakes Kadrú their mother call.Then Manu, high-souled Kas'yap's  
4b wife,
To all the race of men gave life,The Bráhmans first, the Kshatriya caste,Then Vais'yas, and the S'údras last.Sprang from her mouth the Brahman race;Her chest the Kshatriyas' natal place:The Vais'yas from her thighs,'tis said,The S'údras from her feet were bred.From Analá all trees that hangTheir fair fruit-laden branches sprang.The child of beauteous S'ukí boreVinatá, as I taught before:And Surasá and Kadrú wereBorn of one dame, a noble pair.Kadrú gave birth to countless snakesThat roam the earth in woods and brakes.Arun and Garud swift of flightBy V'inatá were given to light,And sons' of Arun red as mornSampati first, then I was born,Me then, O tamer of the toe,

Jutáyus, son of S'yení, know.
Thy ready helper will I be,And guard thy house, if thou agree:When thou and Lakshman urge the chaseBy Sítá's side shall be my place.'   With courteous thanks for promised aid,     The prince, to rapture stirred,   Bent low, and due obeisance paid,     Embraced the royal bird.
p. 247
He often in the days gone by   Had heard his father tellHow, linked with him in friendship's tie,   He loved Jatáyus well.He hastened to his trusted friend   His darling to confide,And through the wood his steps to bend   By strong Jatáyus' side.On to the grove, with Lakshman near,   The prince his way pursuedTo free those pleasant shades from fear   And slay the giant brood.
Footnotes

245:1 The Madhúka, or, as it is now called, Mahuwá, is 
the Bassia latifolia, a tree from whose blossoms a spirit 
is extracted.
245:1b 'I should have doubted whether Manu could 
have been the right reading here, but that it occurs again 
in verse 29, where it is in like manner followed in verse 31 by Analá, so that it would certainly seem that the name Manu is intended to stand for a female, the daughter of Daksha. The Gauda recension, followed by Signor Gorresio (III 20, 12), adopts an entirely different reading at the end of the line, viz. Balám Atibalám api, "Balá and Atibilá," instead of Manu and Analá. I see that Professor Roth s.v. adduces the authority of the Amara Kosha and of the Commentator on Pánini for stating that the word sometimes means "the wife of Manu." In the following text of the Mahábhárata I. 2553. also, Manu appears to be the name of a female: Anaradyam, Manum, Vansám, Asurám, Márganapriyám, Anúpám, Subhagdm, Bhásím iti Prádhá vyajayata. "Prádhá (daughter of Daksha) bore Anavadyá, Manu, Vans'á, Márganaprivá, Anúpá, Subhagá. and Bhásí."' Muir's Sanskrit Text, Vol. I. p. 116.
246:1 The elephant of Indra.
246:2 Golingúlas, described as a kind of monkey, of a 

black colour, and having a tail like a cow.
246:1b Eight elephants attached to the four quarters and 
intermediate points of the compass, to support and 
guard the earth.
246:2b Some scholars identify the centaurs with the 
Gandharvas.
246:3b The hooded serpents, says the commentator Tírtha, were the offspring of Surasá: all others of Kadrú.
246:4b The text reads Kás'yapa, "a descendant of Kas'yapa," who according to Rám. II. l0, 6, ought to be 
Vivasvat. But as it is stated in the preceding part of this passage III. 14, 11 f. that Manu was one of Kasyapa's eight wives, we must here read Kasyapa. The Ganda recension reads (III, 20, 30) Manur manushyams cha tutha janayámása Raghana**, instead of the corresponding line in the Bombay edition.' Muir's Sanskrit Text, Vol I, p. 117.
Next: Canto XV.: Panchavatt.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XV.: PANCHAVATT.
Arrived at Panchavatí's shade
Where silvan life and serpents strayed,Ráma in words like these addressedLakshman of vigour unrepressed:   'Brother, our home is here: beholdThe grove of which the hermit told:The bowers of Panchavatí seeMade fair by every blooming tree.Now, brother, bend thine eyes around;With skilful glance survey the grouud:Here be some spot selected, bestApproved for gentle hermits' rest,Where thou, the Maithil dame, and IMay dwell while seasons sweetly fly.Some pleasant spot be chosen wherePure waters gleam and trees are fair,Some nook where flowers and wood are foundAnd sacred grass and springs abound.'   Then Lakshman, Sitá standing by,Raised reverent hands, and made reply:   'A hundred years shall flee, and stillWill I obey my brothers will:Select thyself a pleasant spot;Be mine the care to rear the cot.'

The glorious chieftain, pleased to hear
That loving speech that soothed his ear,Selected with observant careA spot with every charm most fair.He stood within that calm retreat,A shade for hermits' home most meet,And thus Sumitrá's son addressed,While his dear hand in his he pressed:   'See, see this smooth and lovely gladeWhich flowery trees encircling shade:Do thou, beloved Lakshman rearA pleasant cot to lodge us here.I see beyond that feathery brakeThe gleaming of a lilied lake,Where flowers in sunlike glory throwFresh odours from the wave below.Agastva's words now find we true,He told the charms which here we view:
Here are the trees that blossom o'er
Godávarí's most lovely shore.Whose pleasant flood from side to sideWith swans and geese is beautified,And fair banks crowded with the deerThat steal from every covert near.The peacock's cry is loud and shrillFrom many a tall and lovely hill,Green-belted by the trees that waveFull blossoms o'er the rock and cave.

Like elephants whose huge fronts glow
With painted streaks, the mountains showLong lines of gold and silver sheenWith copper's darker hues between.With every tree each hill is graced,Where creepers blossom interlaced.Look where the Sál's long branches sway,And palms their fanlike leaves display;The date-tree And the Jak are near,And their long stems Tamálas rear.See the tall Mango lift his head,As'okas all their glory spread,The Ketak her sweet buds unfold,And Champacs hang their cups of gold.  
1
The spot is pure and pleasant hereAre multitudes of birds and deer.O Lakshman, with our father's friendWhat happy hours we here shall spend!'   He spoke: the conquering Lakshman heard.Obedient to his brother's word.Raised by his toil a cottage stoodTo shelter Ráma in the woodOf ample size, with leaves o'erlaid,Of hardened earth the walls were made.The strong bamboos his hands had felledFor pillars fair the roof upheld,And rafter, beam, and lath suppliedWell interwrought from side to side.Then Samí  
2 boughs he deftly spread

Enlaced with knotted cord o'erhead,
Well thatched above from ridge to eavesWith holy grass, and reed, and leaves.The mighty chief with careful toilHad cleared the ground and smoothed the soil
p. 248
Where now, his loving labour done,Rose a fair home for Raghu's son.Then when his work was duly wrought,Godávarís sweet stream he sought,Bathed, plucked the lilies, and a storeOf fruit and berries homeward bore.Then sacrifice he duly paid,And wooed the Gods their hopes to aid,And then to Ráma proudly showedThe cot prepared for his abode,Then Raghu's son with Sítá gazedUpon the home his hands had raised,And transport thrilled his bosom throughHis leafy hermitage to view.The glorious son of Raghu roundHis brother's neck his arms enwound,And thus began his sweet addressOf deep-felt joy and gentleness:'Well pleased am I, dear lord, to seeThis noble work performed by thee.For this,--sole grace I can bestow,--

About thy neck mine arms I throw.
So wise art thou, thy breast is filledWith grateful thoughts, in duty skilled,Our mighty father, free from stain,In thee, his offspring, lives again.'   Thus spoke the prince, who lent a graceTo fortune, pride of Raghu's race;Then in that spot whose pleasant shadeGave store of fruit, content he stayed.With Lakshman and his Maithil spouseHe spent his day's neath sheltering boughs,As happy as a God on highLives in his mansion in the sky.
Footnotes
247:1 The original verses merely name the trees. I have 
been obliged to amplify slightly and to omit some quas 
versu dicere non est; e.g. the tinis'a (Dalbergia ougeiniensis), punnága (Rottleria tinctoria) tilaka (not named), syandana (Dalbergia ougeiniensis again) vandana (unknown) nipa (Nauclea Kadamba) lakucha (Artoearpus lacucha), dhava (Grislea tomentosa), As'vakarna (another name for the Sál), S'amí (Acacia Suma) khad*ra (Mimosa*catechu) kins'*ka (Buteafrondosa) pátala (Bignonia suaveolens).

247:2 Acacia Suma.
Next: Canto XVI.: Winter.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVI.: WINTER.
While there the high-souled hero spent
His tranquil hours in sweet content,The glowing autumn passed, and thenCame winter so beloved of men.   One morn, to bathe, at break of dayTo the fair stream he took his way.Behind him, with the Maithil dameBearing a pitcher Lakshman came,And as he went the mighty manThus to his brother chief began:   'The time is come, to thee more dearThan all the months that mark the yearThe gracious seasons' joy and pride,By which the rest are glorified.A robe of hoary rime is spreadO'er earth, with cold engarlanded.The streams we loved no longer please,But near the fire we take our ease,Now pious men to God and shadeOffer young corn's fresh sprouted blade,And purge away their sins with fireBestowed in humble sacrifice.Rich stores of milk delight the swain,And hearts are cheered that longed for gain.

Proud kings whose breasts for conquests glow
Lead bannered troops to smite the foe.Dark is the north: the Lord of DayTo Yama's south  
1 has turned away:
And she--sad widow--shines no more,Reft of the bridal mark  
2 she wore.
Himálaya's hill, ordained of oldThe treasure-house of frost and cold,Scarce conscious of the feebler glow,Is truly now the Lord of Snow.Warmed by the noontide's genial raysDelightful are the glorious days:But how we shudder at the chillOf evening shadows and the rill!How weak the sun, how cold the breeze!How white the rime on grass and trees!The leaves are sere, the woods have lostTheir blossoms killed by nipping frost.Neath open skies we sleep no more:December's nights with rime are hoar:Their triple watch  
3 in length extends
With hours the shortened daylight lends.No more the moon's sun-borrowed raysAre bright, involved in misty haze,As when upon the mirror's sheenThe breath's obscuring cloud is seen.E'en at the full the faint beams failTo struggle through the darksome veil:Changed like her hue, they want the grace

That parts not yet from Sítá's face.
Cold is the western wind, but howIts piercing chill is heightened now,Blowing at early morning twiceAs furious with its breath of ice!See how the dewy tears they weepThe barley, wheat, and woodland steep,Where, as the sun goes up the sky.The curlew and the sáras cry.See where the rice plants scarce upholdTheir full ears tinged with paly gold,Bending their ripe heads slowly downFair as the date tree's flowery crown.Though now the sun has mounted highSeeking the forehead of the sky,Such mist obscures his struggling beams,No bigger than the moon he seems.Though weak at first, his rays at lengthGrow pleasant in their noonday strength,And where a while they chance to fallFling a faint splendour over all.
p. 249
See, o'er the woods where grass is wetWith hoary drops that cling there yet,With soft light clothing earth and boughThere steals a tender glory now.Yon elephant who longs to drink,

Still standing on the river's brink,
Plucks back his trunk in shivering hasteFrom the cold wave he fain would taste.The very fowl that haunt the mereStand doubtful on the bank, and fearTo dip them in the wintry waveAs cowards dread to meet the brave.The frost of night, the rime of dawnBind flowerless trees and glades of lawn:Benumbed in apathetic chillOf icy chains they slumber still.You hear the hidden sáras cryFrom floods that wrapped in vapour lie,And frosty-shining sands revealWhere the unnoticed rivers steal.The hoary rime of dewy night,And suns that glow with tempered lightLend fresh cool flavours to the rillThat sparkles from the tompost hill.The cold has killed the lily's pride:Leaf, filament, and flower have died:With chilling breath rude winds have blown,The withered stalk is left alone.At this gay time, O noblest chief,The faithful Bharat, worn by grief,Lives in the royal town where heSpends weary hours for love of thee.From titles, honour, kingly sway,From every joy he turns away:

Couched on cold earth, his days are passed
With scanty fare and hermit's fast.This moment from his humble bedHe lifts, perhaps, his weary head,And girt by many a follower goesTo bathe where silver Sarjú flows.How, when the frosty morn is dim,Shall Sarjú be a bath for himNursed with all love and tender care,So delicate and young and fair.How bright his hue! his brilliant eyeWith the broad lotus leaf may vie.By fortune stamped for happy fate,His graceful form is tall aud straight.In duty skilled, his words are truth:He proudly rules each lust of youth.Though his strong arm smites down the foe,In gentle speech his accents flow.Yet every joy has he resignedAnd cleaves to thee with heart and mind.Thus by the deeds that he has doneA name in heaven has Bharat won,For in his life he follows yetThy steps, O banished anchoret.Thus faithful Bharat, nobly wise,The proverb of the world belies:'No men, by mothers' guidance led,The footsteps of their fathers tread.'How could Kaikeyí, blest to be

Spouse of the king our sire, and see
A son like virtuous Bharat, blotHer glory with so foul a plot!'   Thus in fraternal love he spoke,And from his lips reproaches broke:But Ráma grieved to hear him chideThe absent mother, and replied:   'Cease, O beloved, cease to blameOur royal father's second dame.Still speak of Bharat first in placeOf old Ikshváku's princely race.My heart, so firmly bent but nowTo dwell in woods and keep my vow,Half melting as I hear thee speakOf Bharat's love, grows soft and weak,With tender joy I bring to mindHis speeches ever sweet and kind.That dear as Amrit took the senseWith most enchanting influence.Ah, when shall I, no more to part,Meet Bharat of the mighty heart?When, O my brother, when shall weThe good and brave S'atrughna see?'Thus as he poured his fond lamentThe son of Raghu onward went:They reached the river, and the threeBathed them in fair Godávarí.Libations of the stream they paidTo every deity and shade,

With hymns of praise, the Sun on high
And sinless Gods to glorify.Fresh from the purifying tide   Resplendent Ráma came,With Lakshman ever by his side,   And the sweet Maithil dame.So Rudra shines by worlds adored,   In glory undefiled,When Nandi  
1 stands beside his lord,
And King Himálaya's child.  2
Footnotes
248:1 The south is supposed to be the residence of the 
departed.
248:2 The sun.
248:3 The night is divided into three watches of four hours each.
Next: Canto XVII.: S'u'panakha'

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVII.: S'U'PANAKHA'
The bathing and the prayer were o'er;
He turned him from the grassy shore,And with his brother and his spouseSought his fair home beneath the boughs,Sitá and Lakshman by his side,On to his cot the hero hied,And after rites at morning dueWithin the leafy shade withdrew.
p. 250
Then, honoured by the devotees,As royal Ráma sat at ease,With Sítá near him, o'er his headA canopy of green boughs spread,He shone as shines the Lord of NightBy Chitrá's  
1 side, his dear delight.
With Lakshman there he sat and toldSweet stories of the days of old,And as the pleasant time he spentWith heart upon each tale intent,A giantess, by fancy led,Came wandering to his leafy shed.Fierce S'úrpanakhí,--her of yore

The Ten-necked tyrant's mother bore,--
Saw Ráma with his noble mienBright as the Gods in heaven are seen;Him from whose brow a glory gleamed,Like lotus leaves his full eyes beamed:Long-armed, of elephantine gait,With hair close coiled in hermit plait:In youthful vigour, nobly framed,By glorious marks a king proclaimed:Like some bright lotus lustrous-hued,With young Kandarpa's  
2 grace endued:
As there like Indra's self he shone,She loved the youth she gazed upon.She grim of eye and foul of faceLoved his sweet glance and forehead's grace:She of unlovely figure, himOf stately form and shapely limb:She whose dim locks disordered hung,Him whose bright hair on high brows clung:She whose fierce accents counselled fear,Him whose soft tones were sweet to hear:She whose dire form with age was dried,Him radiant in his youthful pride:She whose false lips maintained the wrong,Him in the words of virtue strong:She cruel-hearted, stained with sin,Him just in deed and pure within.She, hideous fiend, a thing to hate,Him formed each eye to captivate:

Fierce passion in her bosom woke,
And thus to Raghu's son she spoke:   'With matted hair above thy brows,With bow and shaft and this thy spouse,How hast thou sought in hermit dressThe giant-haunted wilderness?What dost thou here? The cause explain:Why art thou come, and what to gain?'As S'úrpanakhá questioned so,Ráma, the terror of the foe,In answer to the monster's call,With fearless candour told her all.
'King Das'aratha reigned of old,
Like Gods celestial brave and bold.I am his eldest son and heir,And Ráma is the name I bear.This brother, Lakshman, younger born,Most faithful love to me has sworn.My wife, this princess, dear to fame,Is Sitá the Videhan dame.Obedient to my sire's behestAnd by the queen my mother pressed,To keep the law and merit win,I sought this wood to harbour in.But speak, for I of thee in turnThy name, and race, and sire would learn.Thou art of giant race, I ween.Changing at will thy form and mien.

Speak truly, and the cause declare
That bids thee to these shades repair.'   Thus Ráma spoke: the demon heard,And thus replied by passion spurred:'Of giant race, what form soe'erMy fancy wills, 'tis mine to wear.Named S'úrpanakhá here I stray,And where I walk spread wild dismay.King Rávan is my brother: fameHas taught perchance his dreaded name,Strong Kumbhakama slumbering deepIn chains of never-ending sleep:Vibhíshan of the duteous mind.In needs unlike his giant kind:Dúshan and Khara, brave and boldWhose fame by every tongue is told:Their might by mine is far surpassed;But when, O best of men, I castThese fond eyes on thy form, I seeMy chosen love and lord in thee.Endowed with wondrous might am I:Where'er my fancy leads I fly.The poor misshapen Sitá leave,And me, thy worthier bride receive.Look on my beauty, and preferA spouse more meet than one like her:I'll eat that ill-formed woman there:Thy brother too her fate shall share.But come, beloved, thou shalt roam

With me through all our woodland home;
Each varied grove with me shalt seek,And gaze upon each mountain peak.'   As thus she spoke, the monster gazedWith sparkling eyes where passion blazed:Then he, in lore of language learned,This answer eloquent returned:
        * * * * *
Footnotes
249:1 The chief chamberlain and attendant of S'iva or 
Rodra.
249:2 Umá or Párvati, the consort of S'iva.
250:1 A star, one of the favourites of the Moon.
250:2 The God of love.
Next: Canto XVIII.: The Mutilation.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVIII.: THE MUTILATION.
On her ensnared in Ráma's net
His eyes the royal Rama set,
p. 251
And thus, her passion to beguile,Addressed her with a gentle smile:   'I have a wife: behold her here,My Sítá ever true and dear:And one like thee will never brookUpon a rival spouse to look.But there my brother Lakshman stands:Unchained is he by nuptial bands:A youth heroic, loved of all,Gracious and gallant, fair and tall.With winning looks, most nobly bred,Unmatched till now, he longs to wed.Meet to enjoy thy youthful charms,O take him to thy loving arms.Enamoured on his bosom lie,Fair damsel of the radiant eye,As the warm sunlight loves to restUpon her darling Meru's breast.'   The hero spoke, the monster heard,

While passion still her bosom stirred.
Away from Ráma's side she broke,And thus in turn to Lakshman spoke:'Come, for thy bride take me who shineIn fairest grace that suits with thine.Thou by my side from grove to groveOf Dandak's wild in bliss shalt rove.'   Then Lakshman, skilled in soft address,Wooed by the amorous giantess,With art to turn her love aside,To Súrpanakhí thus replied:   'And can so high a dame agreeThe slave-wife of a slave to be?I, lotus-hued! in good and illAm bondsman to my brother's will.Be thou, fair creature radiant-eyed,My honoured brother's younger bride:With faultless tint and dainty limb,A happy wife, bring joy to him.He from his spouse grown old and grey,Deformed, untrue, will turn away,Her withered charms will gladly leave,And to his fair young darling cleave.For who could be so fond and blind,O loveliest of all female kind,To love another dame and slightThy beauties rich in all delight?'   Thus Lakshman praised in scornful jestThe long-toothed fiend with loathly breast,

Who fondly heard his speech, nor knew
His mocking words were aught but true.Again inflamed with love she fledTo Ráma, in his leafy shedWhere Sítá rested by his side,And to the mighty victor cried:   'What, Ráma, canst thou blindly clingTo this old false misshapen thing?Wilt thou refuse the charms of youthFor withered breast and grinning tooth!Canst thou this wretched creature prizeAnd look on me with scornful eyes?This aged crone this very hourBefore thy face will I devour:Then joyous, from all rivals free.Through Dandak will I stray with thee.'   She spoke, and with a glance of flameRushed on the fawn-eyed Maithil dame:So would a horrid meteor marFair Rohiní's soft beaming star.But as the furious fiend drew near,Like Death's dire noose which chills with fear,The mighty chief her purpose stayed,And spoke, his brother to upbraid:'Ne'er should we jest with creatures rude.Of savage race and wrathful mood.Think, Lakshman, think how nearly slainMy dear Videhan breathes again.Let not the hideous wretch escape

Without a mark to mar her shape.
Strike, lord of men, the monstrous fiend,Deformed, and foul, and evil-miened.'   He spoke: then Lakshman's wrath rose high,And there before his brother's eye,He drew that sword which none could stay,And cleft her nose and ears away.Noseless and earless, torn and maimed,With fearful shrieks the fiend exclaimed,And frantic in her wild distressResought the distant wilderness.Deformed, terrific, huge, and dread.As on she moved, her gashes bled,And groan succeeded groan as loudAs roars, ere rain, the thunder cloud.Still on the fearful monster passed,While streams of blood kept falling fast,And with a roar, and arms outspreadWithin the boundless wood she fled.To Janasthán the monster flew;   Fierce Khara there she found,With chieftains of the giant crew   In thousands ranged around.Before his awful feet she bent   And fell with piercing cries,As when a bolt in swift descent   Comes flashing from the skies.There for a while with senses dazed   Silent she lay and scared:

At length her drooping head she raised,
   And all the tale declared,How Ráma, Lakshman, and the dame   Had reached that lonely place:Then told her injuries and shame,   And showed her bleeding face.
        * * * * *
Next: Canto XIX.: The Rousing of Khara.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIX.: THE ROUSING OF KHARA.
When Khara saw his sister lie
With blood-stained limbs and troubled eye,
p. 252
Wild fury in his bosom woke,And thus the monstrous giant spoke;   'Arise, my sister; cast awayThis numbing terror and dismay,And straight the impious hand declareThat marred those features once so fair.For who his finger tip will layOn the black snake in childish play,And unattacked, with idle strokeHis poison-laden fang provoke?Ill-fated fool, he little knowsDeath's noose around his neck he throws,Who rashly met thee, and a draughtOf life-destroying poison quaffed.Strong, fierce as death, 'twas thine to chooseThy way at will, each shape to use;In power and might like one of us:What hand has maimed and marred thee thus?What God or fiend this deed has wrought,

What bard or sage of lofty thought
Was armed with power supremely greatThy form to mar and mutilate?In all the worlds not one I seeWould dare a deed to anger me:Not Indra's self, the Thousand-eyed,Beneath whose hand fierce Páka  
1 died.
My life-destroying darts this dayHis guilty breath shall rend away,E'en as the thirsty wild swan drainsEach milk-drop that the wave retains.Whose blood in foaming streams shall burstO'er the dry ground which lies athirst,When by my shafts transfixed and slainHe falls upon the battle plain?From whose dead corpse shall birds of airThe mangled flesh and sinews tear,And in their gory feast delight,When I have slain him in the fight?Not God or bard or wandering ghost,No giant of our mighty hostShall step between us, or availTo save the wretch when I assail.Collect each scattered sense, recallThy troubled thoughts, and tell me all.What wretch attacked thee in the way,And quelled thee in victorious fray?'   His breast with burning fury fired,Thus Khara of the fiend inquired:

And then with many a tear and sigh
Thus S'úrpanakhá made reply:   ''Tis Das'aratha's sons, a pairStrong, resolute, and young, and fair:In coats of dark and blackdeer's hide,And like the radiant lotus eyed:On berries roots and fruit they feed,And lives of saintly virtue lead:With ordered senses undefiled,Ráma and Lakshman are they styled.
Fair as the Minstrels' King  
1b are they,
And stamped with signs of regal sway.
I know not if the heroes traceTheir line from Gods or Dánav 
2b race.
There by these wondering eyes betweenThe noble youths a dame was seen,Fair, blooming, young, with dainty waist,And all her bright apparel graced.For her with ready heart and mindThe royal pair their strength combined,And brought me to this last distress,Like some lost woman, comfortless.Perfidious wretch! my soul is fainHer foaming blood and theirs to drain.O let me head the vengeful fight,And with this hand my murderers smite.Come, brother, hasten to fulfilThis longing of my eager will.

On to the battle! Let me drink
Their lifeblood as to earth they sink.'   Then Khara, by his sister pressed,Inflamed with fury, gave his hestTo twice seven giants of his crew,Fierce as the God of death to view:   'Two men equipped with arms, who wearDeerskin and bark and matted hair,Leading a beauteous dame, have strayedTo the wild gloom of Dandak's shade.These men, this cursed woman slay,And hasten back without delay,That this my sister's lips may beRed with the lifeblood of the three.Giants, my wounded sister longsTo take this vengeance for her wrongs.With speed her dearest wish fulfil,And with your might these creatures kill.Soon as your matchless strength shall layThese brothers dead in battle fray,She in triumphant joy will laugh,And their hearts' blood delighted quaff.'   The giants heard the words he said,And forth with S'úrpanakhá sped,As mighty clouds in autumn flyUrged by the wind along the sky.
        * * * * *

Footnotes
252:1 A demon slain by Indra.
Next: Canto XX.: The Giants' Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XX.: THE GIANTS' DEATH.
Fierce S'úrpanakhá with her train
To Ráma's dwelling came again,And to the eager giants showedWhere Sítá and the youths abode.Within the leafy cot they spiedThe hero by his consort's side,And faithful Lakshman ready stillTo wait upon his brother's will.
p. 253
Then noble Ráma raised his eyeAnd saw the giants standing nigh,And then, as nearer still they pressed.His glorious brother thus addressed,'Be thine a while, my brother dear,To watch o'er Sítá's safety here,And I will slay these creatures whoThe footsteps of my spouse pursue.'   He spoke, and reverent Lakshman heardSubmissive to his brother's word.The son of Raghu, virtuous-souled,Strung his great bow adorned with gold,And, with the weapon in his hand,

Addressed him to the giant band:
'Ráma and Lakshman we, who springFrom Das'aratha, mighty King;We dwell a while with Sítá hereIn Dandak forest wild and drear.On woodland roots and fruit we feed,Aud lives of strictest rule we lead.Say why would ye our lives oppressWho sojourn in the wilderness.Sent hither by the hermits' prayerWith bow and darts unused to spare,For vengeance am I come to slayYour sinful band in battle fray.Rest as ye are: remain content,Nor try the battle's dire event.Unless your offered lives ye spurn,O rovers of the night, return.'   They listened while the hero spoke,Aud fury in each breast awoke.The Bráhman-slayers raised on highTheir mighty spears and made reply:They spoke with eyes aglow with ire,While Ráma's burnt with vengeful tire,Aud answered thus, in fury wild,That peerless chief whose tones were mild:   'Nay thou hast angered, overbold,Khara our lord, the mighty-souled,And for thy sin, in battle strifeShalt yield to us thy forfeit life.

No power hast thou alone to stand
Against the numbers of our band.'Twere vain to match thy single mightAgainst us in the front of fight.When we equipped for fight advanceWith brandished pike and mace and lance,Thou, vanquished in the desperate field,Thy bow, thy strength, thy life shalt yield.'   With bitter words and threatening mienThus furious spoke the fierce fourteen,And raising scymitar and spearOn Ráma rushed in wild career.Their levelled spears the giant crewAgainst the matchless hero threw.His bow the son of Raghu bent,And twice seven shafts to meet them sent,And every javelin sundered fellBy the bright darts he aimed so well.   The hero saw: his anger grewTo fury: from his side he drewFresh sunbright arrows pointed keen,In number, like his foes, fourteen.His bow he grasped, the string he drew,And gazing on the giant crew,As Indra casts the levin, soShot forth his arrrows at the foe.The hurtling arrows, stained with gore,Through the fiends' breasts a passage tore,And in the earth lay buried deep

As serpents through an ant-hill creep
Like trees uptorn by stormy blastThe shattered fiends to earth were cast,And there with mangled bodies they,Bathed in their blood and breathless, lay.   With fainting heart and furious eyeThe demon saw her champions die.With drying wounds that scarcely bledBack to her brother's home she fled.Oppressed with pain, with loud lamentAt Khara's feet the monster bent.There like a plant whence slowly comeThe trickling drops of oozy gum,With her grim features pale with painShe poured her tears in ceaseless rain,There routed S'úrpanakhá lay,   And told her brother all,The issue of the bloody fray,   Her giant champions' fall.
        * * * * *
Footnotes
252:1b Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.

252:2b Titanic.
Next: Canto XXI.: The Rousing of Khara.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXI.: THE ROUSING OF KHARA.
Low in the dust he saw her lie,
And Khara's wrath grew fierce and high,Aloud he cried to her who cameDisgracefully with baffled aim:'I sent with thee at thy requestThe bravest of my giants, bestOf all who feed upon the slain:Why art thou weeping here again?Still to their master's interest true,My faithful, noble, loyal crew.Though slaughtered in the bloody fray.Would yet their monarch's word obey.Now I, my sister, fain would knowThe cause of this thy fear and woe,Why like a snake thou writhest there,Calling for aid in wild despair.Nay, lie not thus in lowly guise:Cast off thy weakness and arise!'   With soothing words the giant chiefAssuaged the fury of her grief.Her weeping eyes she slowly driedAnd to her brother thus replied:'I sought thee in my shame and fearWith severed nose and mangled ear:

My gashes like a river bled,
I sought thee and was comforted.
p. 254
Those twice seven giants, brave and strong,Thou sentest to avenge the wrong,To lay the savage Ráma low,And Lakshman who misused me so.But ah, the shafts of Ráma throughThe bodies of my champions flew:Though madly fierce their spears they plied,Beneath his conquering might they died.I saw them, famed for strength and speed,I saw my heroes fall and bleed:Great trembling seized my every limbAt the great deed achieved by him.In trouble, horror, doubt, and dread,Again to thee for help I fled.While terror haunts my troubled sight,I seek thee, rover of the night.And canst thou not thy sister freeFrom this wide waste of troublous seaWhose sharks are doubt and terror, whereEach wreathing wave is dark despair?Low lie on earth thy giant trainBy ruthless Ráma's arrows slain,And all the mighty demons, fedOn blood, who followed me are dead.

Now if within thy breast may be
Pity for them and love for me,If thou, O rover of the night,Have valour and with him can fight,Subdue the giants' cruel foeWho dwells where Dandak's thickets grow.But if thine arm in vain assayThis queller of his foes to slay,Now surely here before thine eyes,Wronged and ashamed thy sister dies.Too well, alas, too well I seeThat, strong in war as thou mayst be,Thou canst not in the battle standWhen Ráma meets thee hand to hand.Go forth, thou hero but in name,Assuming might thou canst not claim;Call friend and kin, no longer stay:Away from Janasthán, away!Shame of thy race! the weak aloneBeneath thine arm may sink o'erthrown:Fly Ráma and his brother: theyAre men too strong for thee to slay.How canst thou hope, O weak and base,To make this grove thy dwelling-place?With Ráma's might unmeet to vie,O'ermastered thou wilt quickly die.A hero strong in valorous deedIs Ráma, Das'aratha's seed:And scarce of weaker might than he

His brother chief who mangled me.'
   Thus wept and wailed in deep distressThe grim misshapen giantess:Before her brother's feet she layO'erwhelmed with grief, and swooned away.
        * * * * *
Next: Canto XXII: Khara's Wrath.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXII: KHARA'S WRATH.
Roused by the taunting words she spoke,
The mighty Khara's wrath awoke,And there, while giants girt him round,In these fierce words an utterance found:   'I cannot, peerless one, containMine anger at this high disdain,Galling as salt when sprinkled o'erThe rawness of a bleeding sore.Ráma in little count I hold,Weak man whose days are quickly told.The caitiff with his life to-dayFor all his evil deeds shall pay.Dry, sister, dry each needless tear,Stint thy lament and banish fear,For Ráma and his brother goThis day to Yama's realm below.My warrior's axe shall stretch him slain,Ere set of sun, upon the plain,Then shall thy sated lips be redWith his warm blood in torrents shed.'   As Khara's speech the demon heard,With sudden joy her heart was stirred:She fondly praised him as the boastAnd glory of the giant host.

First moved to ire by taunts and stings,
Now soothed by gentle flatterings,To Dúshan, who his armies led,The demon Khara spoke, and said:   'Friend, from the host of giants callFull fourteen thousand, best of all,Slaves of my will, of fearful might,Who never turn their backs in fight:Fiends who rejoice to slay and mar,Dark as the clouds of autumn are:Make ready quickly, O my friend,My chariot and the bows I bend.My swords, my shafts of brilliant sheen,My divers lances long and keen.On to the battle will I leadThese heroes of Pulastya's seed,And thus, O famed for warlike skill,Ráma my wicked foeman kill.'   He spoke, and ere his speech was done,His chariot glittering like the sun,Yoked and announced, by Dúshan's care,With dappled steeds was ready there.High as a peak from Meru rentIt burned with golden ornament:The pole of lazulite, of goldWere the bright wheels whereon it rolled.With gold and moonstone blazoned o'er,Fish, flowers, trees, rocks, the panels bore;Auspicious birds embossed thereon,

And stars in costly emblem shone.
O'er flashing swords his banner hung,And sweet bells, ever tinkling, swung.
p. 255
That mighty host with sword and shieldAnd oar was ready for the field:And Khara saw, and Dúshan cried,'Forth to the fight, ye giants, ride."Then banners waved, and shield and swordFlashed as the host obeyed its lord.From Janasthán they sallied outWith eager speed, and din, and shout,Armed with the mace for close attacks,The bill, the spear, the battle-axe,Steel quoit and club that flashed afar,Huge bow and sword and scymitar,The dart to pierce, the bolt to strike,The murderous bludgeon, lance, and pike.So forth from Janasthán, intentOn Khara's will, the monsters went.He saw their awful march: not farBehind the host he drove his car.Ware of his master's will, to speedThe driver urged each gold-decked steed.Then forth the warrior's coursers sprang,And with tumultuous murmur rangEach distant quarter of the sky

And realms that intermediate lie.
High and more high within his breastHis pride triumphant rose,While terrible as Death he pressedOnward to slay his foes,'More swiftly yet,' as on they fled,He cried in thundering tonesLoud as a cloud that overheadHails down a flood of stones.
Next: Canto XXIII.: The Omens.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIII.: THE OMENS.
As forth upon its errand went
That huge ferocious armament,An awful cloud, in dust and gloom,With threatening thunders from its wombPoured in sad augury a floodOf rushing water mixt with blood.The monarch's steeds, though strong and fleet,Stumbled and fell: and yet their feetPassed o'er the bed of flowers that layFresh gathered on the royal way.No gleam of sunlight struggled throughThe sombre pall of midnight hue,Edged with a line of bloody red,Like whirling torches overhead.A vulture, fierce, of mighty size.Terrific with his cruel eyes,Perched on the staff enriched with pold,Whence hung the flag in many a foldEach ravening bird, each beast of preyWhere Janasthán's wild thickets lay,Rose with a long discordant cryAnd gathered as the host went by,And from the south long, wild, and shrill,Came spirit voices boding ill.

Like elephants in frantic mood,
Vast clouds terrific, sable-hued,Hid all the sky where'er they boreTheir load of water mixt with gore.Above, below, around were spreadThick shades of darkness strange and dread,Nor could the wildered glance descryA point or quarter of the sky.Then came o'er heaven a sanguine hue,Though evening's flush not yet was due,While each ill-omened bird that fliesAssailed the king with harshest cries.There screamed the vulture and the crane,And the loud jackal shrieked again.Each hideous thing that bodes arightDisaster in the coming fight,With gaping mouth that hissed and flamed,The ruin of the host proclaimed.Eclipse untimely reft awayThe brightness of the Lord of Day,And near his side was seen to glowA mace-like comet boding woe.Then while the sun was lost to viewA mighty wind arose and blew,And stars like fireflies shed their light,Nor waited for the distant night.The lilies drooped, the brooks were dried,The fish and birds that swam them died,And every tree that was so fair

With flower and fruit was stripped and bare.
The wild wind ceased, yet, raised on high,Dark clouds of dust involved the sky.In doleful twitter long sustainedThe restless Sárikás  
1 complained,
And from the heavens with flash and flameTerrific meteors roaring came.Earth to her deep foundation shookWith rock and tree and plain and brook,As Khara with triumphant shout,Borne in his chariot, sallied out.His left arm throbbed: he knew full wellThat omen, and his visage fell.Each awful sign the giant viewed,And sudden tears his eye bedewed.Care on his brow sat chill and black,Yet mad with wrath he turned not back.Upon each fearful sight that raisedThe shuddering hair the chieftain gazed,And laughing in his senseless prideThus to his giant legions cried:'By sense of mightiest strength upborne,These feeble signs I laugh to scorn.I could bring down the stars that shineIn heaven with these keen shafts of mine.Impelled by warlike fury ICould cause e'en Death himself to die.
p. 256

I will not seek my home again
Until my pointed shafts have slainThis Raghu's son so fierce in pride,And Lakshman by his brother's side.And she, my sister, she for whomThese sons of Raghu meet their doom,She with delighted lips shall drain.The lifeblood of her foemen slain.Fear not for me: I ne'er have knownDefeat, in battle overthrown.Fear not for me, O giants; trueAre the proud words I speak to you.The king of Gods who rules on high,If wild Air'avat bore him nigh,Should fall before me bolt in hand:And shall these two my wrath withstand!'   He ended and the giant hostWho heard their chief's triumphant boast,Rejoiced with equal pride elate,Entangled in the noose of Fate.   Then met on high in bright array,With eyes that longed to see the fray,God and Gandharva, sage and saint,With beings pure from earthly taint.Blest for good works aforetime wrought,Thus each to other spake his thought:'Now joy to Br'ahmans, joy to kine,And all whom world count half divine!

May Raghu's offspring slay in fight
Pulastya's sons who roam by night!'In words like these and more, the bestOf high-souled saints their hopes expressed,Bending their eager eyes from whereCar-borne with Gods they rode in air.Beneath them stretching far, they viewedThe giants' death-doomed multitude.They saw where, urged with fury, farBefore the host rolled Khara's car,And close beside their leader cameTwelve giant peers of might and fame. 
1
Four other chiefs  2 before the rest
Behind their leader D'ushan pressed.   Impetuous, cruel, dark, and dread,     All thirsting for the fray,   The hosts of giant warriors sped     Onward upon their way.   With eager speed they reached the spot     Where dwelt the princely two,--   Like planets in a league to blot     The sun and moon from view.
Footnotes
255:1 The Sáriká is the Maina, a bird like a starling.

256:1 Their names which are rather unmanageable and 
of no importance are Syenagama, Prithus'y'ama, 
Yajnas'atru, Vihangama, Durjaya, Parav'ira'ksha, Purusha, K'alak'amuka, Megham'ali, M'aham'ali*, *Varasya, Rudhir'as'ana.
256:2 Mah'akap'ala, Sth'ul'aksha, Pram'atha, Tris'iras.
Next: Canto XXIV.: The Host In Sight.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIV.: THE HOST IN SIGHT.
While Khara urged by valiant rage,
Drew near that little hermitage,Those wondrous signs in earth and skySmote on each prince's watching rye.When Rama saw those signs of woeFraught with destruction to the foe,With bold impatience scarce repressedHis brother chief he thus addressed:   'These fearful signs, my brother bold,Which threaten all our foes, behold:All laden, as they strike the view,With ruin to the fiendish crew.The angry clouds are gathering fast,Their skirts with dusty gloom o'ercast,And harsh with loud-voiced thunder, rainThick drops of blood upon the plain.See, burning for the coming light,My shafts with wreaths of smoke are white,And my great bow embossed with goldThrobs eager for the master's hold.Each bird that through the forest fliesSends out its melancholy cries.All signs foretell the dangerous strife,The jeopardy of limb and life.

Each sight, each sound gives warning clear
That foemen meet and death is near.But courage, valiant brother! wellThe throbbings of mine arm foretellThat ruin waits the hostile powers,And triumph in the fight is ours.I hail the welcome omen: thouArt bright of lace and clear of brow.For Lakshman, when the eye can traceA cloud upon the warrior's faceStealing the cheerful light away,His life is doomed in battle fray.List, brother, to that awful cry:With shout and roar the fiends draw nigh.With thundering beat of many a drumThe savage-hearted giants come.The wise who value safety knowTo meet, prepared, the coming blow:In paths of prudence trained arightThey watch the stroke before it smite.Take thou thine arrows and thy bow,Aud with the Maithil lady goFor shelter to the mountain caveWhere thickest trees their branches wave.I will not have thee, Lakshman, sayOne word in answer, but obey.By all thy honour for these feetOf mine, dear brother, I entreat.Thy warlike arm, I know could, smite

To death these rovers of the night;
But I this day would fight aloneTill all the fiends be overthrown.'
p. 257
He spake: and Lakshman answered naught:His arrows and his bow he brought,And then with Sítá following hiedFor shelter to the mountain side.As Lakshman and the lady throughThe forest to'the cave withdrew,'Tis well,' cried Ráma. Then he bracedHis coat of mail around his waist.When, bright as blazing fire, uponHis mighty limbs that armour shone,The hero stood like some great lightUprising in the dark of night.His dreadful shafts were by his side;His trusty bow he bent and plied.Prepared he stood: the bowstring rang,Filling the welkin with the clang.
The high-souled Gods together drew
The wonder of the fight to view,The saints made free from spot and stain,And bright Gandharvas' heavenly train.Each glorious sage the assembly sought,Each saint divine of loftiest thought,

And filled with zeal for Ráma's sake.
Thus they whose deeds were holy spake:
'Now be it well with Bráhmans, now
Well with the worlds and every cow!Let Ráma in the deadly frayThe fiends who walk in darkness slay,As He who bears the discus 
1 slew
The chieftains of the Asur crew.'
Then each with anxious glances viewed
His fellow and his speech renewed:'There twice seven thousand giants standWith impious heart and cruel hand:Here Ráma stands, by virtue known:How can the hero fight alone?'
Thus royal sage and Bráhman saint,
Spirit, and Virtue free from taint,And all the Gods of heaven who rodeOn golden cars, their longing showed.Their hearts with doubt and terror rent,They saw the giants' armament,And Ráma clothed in warrior might,Forth standing in the front of fight.Lord of the arm no toil might tire,He stood majestic in his ire,Matchless in form as Rudra 
2 when
His wrath is fierce on Gods or men.

While Gods and saints in close array
Held converse of the coming fray,The army of the fiends drew nearWith sight and sound that counselled fear.Long, loud and deep their war-cry pealed,As on they rushed with flag and shield,Each, of his proper valour proud,Urging to fight the demon crowd.
His ponderous bow each warrior tried,
And swelled his bulk with martial pride.'Mid shout and roar and trampling feet.And thunder of the drums they beat,Loud and more loud the tumult wentThroughout the forest's vast extent,And all the life that moved withinThe woodland trembled at the din.In eager haste all fled to findSome tranquil spot, nor looked behind.
With every arm of war supplied,
On-rushing wildly like the tideOf some deep sea, the giant hostApproached where Ráma kept his post.Then he, in battle skilled and tried,Bent his keen eye on every side,And viewed the host of Khara faceTo face before his dwelling-place.

He drew his arrows forth, and reared
And strained that bow which foemen feared,And yielded to the vengeful swayOf fierce desire that host to slay.Terrific as the ruinous fireThat ends the worlds, he glowed in ire;And his tremendous form dismayedThe Gods who roam the forest shade.For in the furious wrath that glowedWithin his soul the hero showedLike S'iva when his angry mightStayed Daksha's sacrificial rite. 
1b
Like some great cloud at dawn of day   When first the sun upsprings,And o'er the gloomy mass each ray   A golden radiance flings:Thus showed the children of the night,   Whose mail and chariots threw,With gleam of bows and armlets bright,   Flashes of flamy hue.
Footnotes
257:1 Vishnu, who bears a chakra or discus.
257:2 S'iva.

Next: Canto XXV.: The Battle.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXV.: THE BATTLE.
When Khara with the hosts he led
Drew near to Ráma's leafy shed,He saw that queller of the foeStand ready with his ordered bow.He saw, and burning at the viewHis clanging bow he raised and drew,And bade his driver urge apaceHis car to meet him face to face.Obedient to his master's hestHis eager steeds the driver pressedOn to the spot where, none to aid,The strong-armed chief his weapon swayed.Soon as the children of the nightSaw Khara rushing to the fight,
p. 258
His lords with loud unearthly cryFollowed their chief and gathered nigh.As in his car the leader rodeWith all his lords around, he showedLike the red planet fiery MarsSurrounded by the lesser stars.Then with a horrid yell that rent

The air, the giant chieftain sent
A thousand darts in rapid showerOn Ráma matchless in his power.The rovers of the night, impelledBy fiery rage which naught withheld,Upon the unconquered prince, who strainedHis fearful bow, their arrows rained.With sword and club, with mace and pike,With spear and axe to pierce and strike,Those furious fiends on every sideThe unconquerable hero plied.The giant legions huge and strong,Like clouds the tempest drives along,Rushed upon Ráma with the speedOf whirling car, and mounted steed,And hill-like elephant, to slayThe matchless prince in battle fray.Then upon Ráma thick and fastThe rain of mortal steel they cast,As labouring clouds their torrents shedUpon the mountain-monarch's 
1 head.
As near and nearer round him drewThe warriors of the giant crew,He showed like S'iva girt by allHis spirits when night's shadows fall.As the great deep receives each rillAnd river rushing from the hill,He bore that flood of darts, and brokeWith well-aimed shaft each murderous stroke.

By stress of arrowy storm assailed,
And wounded sore, he never failed,Like some high mountain which defiesThe red bolts flashing from the skies.With ruddy streams each limb was dyedFrom gaping wounds in breast and side,Showing the hero like the sun'Mid crimson clouds ere day is done.Then, at that sight of terror, faintGrew God, Gandharva, sage, and saint,Trembling to see the prince opposeHis single might to myriad foes.But waxing wroth, with force unspent,He strained his bow to utmost bent,And forth his arrows keen and trueIn hundreds, yea in thousands flew,--Shafts none could ward, and none endure:Death's fatal noose was scarce so sure.As 'twere in playful ease he shotHis gilded shafts, and rested not.With swiftest flight and truest aimUpon the giant hosts they came.
Each smote, each stayed a foeman's breath
As fatal as the coil of Death,Each arrow through a giant toreA passage, and besmeared with gore,Pursued its onward way and throughThe air with flamy brilliance flew.

Unnumbered were the arrows sent
From the great bow which Ráma bent,And every shaft with iron headThe lifeblood of a giant shed.Their pennoned bows were cleft, nor mailNor shield of hide could aught avail.For Ráma's myriad arrows toreThrough arms, and bracelets which they wore,And severed mighty warriors' thighsLike trunks of elephants in size,And cut resistless passage sheerThrough gold-decked horse and charioteer,Slew elephant and rider, slewThe horseman and the charger too,And infantry unnumbered sentTo dwell 'neath Yama's government.Then rose on high a fearful yellOf rovers of the night, who fellBeneath that iron torrent, soreWounded by shafts that rent and tore.So mangled by the ceaseless stormOf shafts of every kind and form,Such joy they found, as forests feelWhen scorched by flame, from Ráma's steel.The mightiest still the fight maintained,And furious upon Ráma rainedDart, arrow, spear, with wild attacksOf mace, and club, and battle-axe.But the great chief, unconquered yet,

Their weapons with his arrows met,
Which severed many a giant's head,And all the plain with corpses spread.With sundered bow and shattered shieldHeadless they sank upon the field,As the tall trees, that felt the blastOf Garud's wing, to earth were cast.The giants left unslaughtered thereWhere filled with terror and despair,And to their leader Khara fledFaint, wounded, and discomfited.These fiery Dúshan strove to cheer,And poised his bow to calm their fear;Then fierce as He who rules the dead,When wroth, on angered Ráma sped.By Dúshan cheered, the demons castTheir dread aside and rallied fastWith Sáls, rocks, palm-trees in their handsWith nooses, maces, pikes, and brands,Again upon the godlike manThe mighty fiends infuriate ran,These casting rocks like hail, and theseA whelming shower of leafy trees.Wild, wondrous fight, the eye to scare,And raise on end each shuddering hair,
p. 259
As with the fiends who loved to rove

By night heroic Ráma strove!
The giants in their fury pliedRáma with darts on every side.Then, by the gathering demons pressedFrom north and south and east and west,By showers of deadly darts assailedFrom every quarter fiercely hailed,Girt by the foes who swarmed around,He raised a mighty shout whose soundStruck terror. On the giant crewHis great Gándharva 
1 arrow flew.
A thousand mortal shafts were rainedFrom the orbed bow the hero strained,Till east and west and south and northWere filled with arrows volleyed forth.They heard the fearful shout: they sawHis mighty hand the bowstring draw,Yet could no wounded giant's eyeSee the swift storm of arrows fly.Still firm the warrior stood and castHis deadly missiles thick and fast.Dark grew the air with arrowy hailWhich hid the sun as with a veil.Fiends wounded, falling, fallen, slain,All in a moment, spread the plain,And thousands scarce alive were leftMangled, and gashed, and torn, and cleft.Dire was the sight, the plain o'erspreadWith trophies of the mangled dead.

There lay, by Ráma's missiles rent,
Full many a priceless ornament,With severed limb and broken gem,Hauberk and helm and diadem.There lay the shattered car, the steed,The elephant of noblest breed,The splintered spear, the shivered mace,Chouris and screens to shade the face.The giants saw with bitterest painTheir warriors weltering on the plain,Nor dared again his might opposeWho scourged the cities of his foes.
Footnotes
257:1b See Additional Notes--DAKSHA'S SACRIFICE.
258:1 Himálaya.
Next: Canto XXVI.: Dúshan's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVI.: DÚSHAN'S DEATH.
When Dúshan saw his giant band
Slaughtered by Ráma's conquering hand,He called five thousand fiends, and gaveHis orders. Bravest of the brave,Invincible, of furious might,Ne'er had they turned their backs in flight.They, as their leader bade them seizeSpears, swords, and clubs, and rocks, and trees.
Poured on the dauntless prince again
A ceaseless shower of deadly rain.The virtuous Ráma, undismayed.Their missiles with his arrows stayed,And weakened, ere it fell, the shockOf that dire hail of tree and rock,And like a bull with eyelids closed,The pelting of the storm opposed.
Then blazed his ire: he longed to smite
To earth the rovers of the night.The wrath that o'er his spirit cameClothed him with splendour as of flame,While showers of mortal darts he poured

Fierce on the giants and their lord.
Dúshan, the foeman's dusky dread,By frenzied rage inspirited,On Raghu's son his missiles castLike Indra's bolts which rend and blast.But Ráma with a trenchant dartCleft Dúshan's ponderous bow apart.And then the gold-decked steeds who drewThe chariot, with four shafts he slew.One crescent dart he aimed which shredClean from his neck the driver's head;Three more with deadly skill addressedStood quivering in the giant's breast.Hurled from his car, steeds, driver slain,The bow he trusted cleft in twain,He seized his mace, strong, heavy, dread,High as a mountain's towering head.With plates of gold adorned and bound,Embattled Gods it crushed and ground.Its iron spikes yet bore the stainsOf mangled foemen's blood and brains.Its heavy mass of jagged steelWas like a thunderbolt to feel,It shattered, as on foes it fell,The city where the senses dwell. 
1b
Fierce Dúshan seized that ponderous maceLike monstrous form of serpent race,And all his savage soul aglowWith fury, rushed upon the foe.

But Raghu's son took steady aim,
And as the rushing giant came,Shore with two shafts the arms whereonThe demon's glittering bracelets shone.His arm at each huge shoulder lopped,The mighty body reeled and dropped.And the great mace to earth was thrownLike Indra's staff when storms have blown,As some vast elephant who liesShorn of his tusks, and bleeding dies,So, when his arms were rent away,Low on the ground the giant lay.The spirits saw the monster die,And loudly rang their joyful cry,'Honour to Ráma! nobly done!Well hast thou fought, Kakutstha's son!
p. 260
   But the great three, the host who led,Enraged to see their chieftain dead,As though Death's toils were round them cast,Rushed upon Ráma fierce and fast,Mahákapála seized, to strikeHis foeman down, a ponderous pike:Sthúláksha charged with spear to fling,Pramáthi with his axe to swing.When Ráma saw, with keen darts heReceived the onset of the three,

As calm as though he hailed a guest
In each, who came for shade and rest.Mahákapála's monstrous headFell with the trenchant dart he sped.His good right hand in battle skilledSthúláksha's eyes with arrows tilled,And trusting still his ready bowHe laid the fierce Pramathi low,Who sank as some tall tree falls downWith bough and branch and leafy crown.Then with five thousand shafts he slewThe rest of Dúshan's giant crew:Five thousand demons, torn and rent,To Yama's gloomy realm he sent.   When Khara knew the fate of allThe giant band and Dúshan's fall,He called the mighty chiefs who ledHis army, and in fury said:   'Now Dúshan and his armed trainLie prostrate on the battle plain.Lead forth an army mightier still,Ráma this wretched man, to kill.Fight ye with darts of every shape,Nor let him from your wrath escape.'   Thus spoke the fiend, by rage impelled,And straight his course toward Ráma held.With S'yenagámí and the restOf his twelve chiefs he onward pressed,And every giant as he went

A storm of well-wrought arrows sent.
Then with his pointed shafts that cameWith gold and diamond bright as flame,Dead to the earth tht hero threwThe remnant of the demon crew.Those shafts with feathers bright as gold,Like flames which wreaths of smoke enfold,Smote down the fiends like tall trees rentBy red bolts from the firmament.A hundred shafts be pointed well:By their keen barbs a hundred fell:A thousand,--and a thousand moreIn battle's front lay drenched in gore.Of all defence and guard bereft,With sundered bows and harness cleft.Their bodies red with bloody stainFell the night-rovers on the plain,Which, covered with the loosened hairOf bleeding giants prostrate there,Like some great altar showed, arrayedFor holy rites with grass o'erlaid.The darksome wood, each glade and dellWhere the wild demons fought and fellWas like an awful hell whose floorIs thick with mire and flesh and gore.   Thus twice seven thousand fiends, a bandWith impious heart and bloody hand,By Raghu's son were overthrown,A man, on foot, and all alone.

Of all who met on that fierce day,
Khara, great chief, survived the fray,The monster of the triple head, 
1
And Raghu's son, the foeman'a dread.The other demon warriors, allSkilful and brave and strong and tall,In front of battle, side by side,Struck down by Lakshman's brother died.   When Khara saw the host he led     Triumphant forth to fight   Stretched on the earth, all smitten dead,     By Ráma's nobler might,   Upon his foe he fiercely glared,     And drove against him fast,   Like Indra when his arm is bared     His thundering bolt to cast.
        * * * * *
Footnotes
259:1 One of the mysterious weapons given to Ráma.
259:1b A periphrasis for the body.

Next: Canto XXVII.: The Death of Tris'iras.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVII.: THE DEATH OF 
TRIS'IRAS.
But Tris'iras, 2 a chieftain dread,
Marked Khara as he onward sped.
And met his car and cried, to stayThe giant from the purposed fray:'Mine be the charge: let me attack,And turn thee from the contest back.Let me go forth, and thou shalt seeThe strong-armed Ráma slain by me.True are the words I speak, my lord:I swear it as I touch my sword:That I this Ráma's blood will spill,Whom every giant's hand should kill.This Ráma will I slay, or heIn battle fray shall conquer me.Restrain thy spirit: check thy car,And view tne combat from afar.Thou, joying o'er the prostrate foe,To Janasthán again shalt go,Or, if I fall in battle's chance,Against my conqueror advance.'   Thus Tris'iras for death who yearned:And Khara from the conflict turned,

'Go forth to battle,' Khara cried;
And toward his foe the giant hied.Borne on a car of glittering hueWhich harnessed coursers fleetly drew,Like some huge hill with triple peakHe onward rushed the prince to seek,
p. 261
Still, like a big cloud, sending outHis arrowy rain with many a shoutLike the deep sullen roars that comeDiscordant from a moistened drum.But Raghu's son, whose watchful eyeBeheld the demon rushing nigh,From the great bow he raised and bentA shower of shafts to meet him sent.Wild grew the fight and wilder yetAs fiend and man in combat met,As when in some dark wood's retreatAn elephant and a lion meet.   The giant bent his bow, and trueTo Ráma's brow three arrows flew.Then, raging as he felt the stroke,These words in anger Ráma spoke:'Heroic chief! is such the powerOf fiends who rove at midnight hour?Soft as the touch of flowers I feelThe gentle blows thine arrows deal.

Receive in turn my shafts, and know
What arrows fly from Ráma's bow.'Thus as he spoke his wrath grew hot.And twice seven deadly shafts he shot,Which, dire as serpent's deadly fang,Straight to the giant's bosom sprang.Four arrows more,--each shaped to dealA mortal wound with barbèd steel,--The glorious hero shot, and slewThe four good steeds the car that drew.Eight other shafts flew straight and fleet,And hurled the driver from his seat,And in the dust the banner laidThat proudly o'er the chariot played.Then as the fiend prepared to boundForth from his useless car to ground,The hero smote him to the heart,And numbed his arm with deadly smart.Again the chieftain, peerless-souled,Seat forth three rapid darts, and rolledWith each keen arrow, deftly sped,Low in the dust a monstrous head.Then yielding to each deadly stroke,Forth spouting streams of blood and smoke,The headless trunk bedrenched with goreFell to the ground and moved no more.The fiends who yet were left with life,Routed and crushed in battle strife,To Khara's side, like trembling deer

Scared by the hunter, fled in fear.
King Khara saw with furious eyeHis scattered giants turn and fly;Then rallying his broken trainAt Raghu's son he drove amain,Like Ráhu  
1 when his deadly might
Comes rushing on the Lord of Night.
Footnotes
260:1 Tris'iras.
260:2 The Three-headed.
261:1 The demon who causes eclipses.
Next: Canto XXVIII.: Khara Dismounted.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVIII.: KHARA DISMOUNTED.
But when he turned his eye where bled
Both Tris'iras and Dúshan dead,Fear o'er the giant's spirit cameOf Ráma's might which naught could tame.He saw his savage legions, thoseWhose force no creature dared oppose,--He saw the leader of his trainBy Ráma's single prowess slain.With burning grief he marked the fewStill left him of his giant crew.As Namuchi  
1b on Indra, so
Rushed the dread demon on his foe.His mighty bow the monster strained,And angrily on Ráma rainedHis mortal arrows in a flood,Like serpent fangs athirst for blood.Skilled in the bowman's warlike art,He plied the string and poised the dart.Here, on his car, and there, he rode,And passages of battle showed,While all the skyey regions grewDark with his arrows as they flew.Then Ráma seized his ponderous bow,And straight the heaven was all aglow

With shafts whose stroke no life might bear
That filled with flash and flame the air,Thick as the blinding torrents sentDown from Parjanya's  
2b firmament.
In space itself no space remained,But all was filled with arrows rainedIncessantly from each great bowWielded by Ráma and his foe.As thus in furious combat, wroughtTo mortal hate, the warriors fought,The sun himself grew faint and pale,Obscured behind that arrowy veil.   As when beneath the driver's steelAn elephant is forced to kneel,So from the hard and pointed headOf many an arrow Ráma bled.High on his car the giant rosePrepared in deadly strife to close,
p. 262
And all the spirits saw him standLike Yama with his noose in hand.For Khara deemed in senseless prideThat he, beneath whose hand had diedThe giant legions, failed at lengthSlow sinking with exhausted strength.But Ráma, like a lion, whenA trembling deer comes nigh his den.

Feared not the demon mad with hate,--
Of lion might and lion gait.Then in his lofty car that glowedWith sunlike brilliance Khura rodeAt Ráma: madly on he cameLike a poor moth that seeks the flame.His archer skill the fiend displayed,And at the place where Ráma laidHis hand, an arrow cleft in twoThe mighty bow the hero drew.Seven arrows by the giant sent,Bright as the bolts of Indra, rentTheir way through mail and harness joints,And pierced him with their iron points.On Ráma, hero unsurpassed,A thousand shafts smote thick and fast,While as each missile struck, rang outThe giant's awful battle-shout.His knotted arrows pierced and toreThe sunbright mail the hero wore,Till, band and buckle rent away,Glittering on the ground it lay.Then pierced in shoulder, breast, and side,Till every limb with blood was dyed,The chieftain in majestic ireShone glorious as the smokeless fire.Then loud and long the war-cry roseOf Ráma, terror of his foes,As, on the giant's death intent.

A ponderous bow he strung and bent,--
Lord Vishnu's own, of wondrous size,--Agastya gave the heavenly prize.Then rushing on the demon foe,He raised on high that mighty bow,And with his well-wrought shafts, whereonBright gold between the feathers shone,He struck the pennon fluttering o'erThe chariot, and it waved no more.That glorious flag whose every foldWas rich with blazonry and gold,Fell as the sun himself by allThe Gods' decree might earthward fall.From wrathful Khara's hand, whose artWell knew each vulnerable part,Four keenly-piercing arrows flew,And blood in Ráma's bosom drew,With every limb distained with goreFrom deadly shafts which rent and tore,From Khara's clanging bowstring shots,The prince's wrath waxed wondrous hot.His hand upon his bow that bestOf mighty archers firmly pressed,And from the well-drawn bowstring, trueEach to its mark, six arrows flew.One quivered in the giant's head,With two his brawny shoulders bled;Three, with the crescent heads they bore,Deep in his breast a passage tore.

Thirteen, to which the stone had lent
The keenest point, were swiftly sentOn the fierce giant, every oneDestructive, gleaming like the sun.With four the dappled steeds he slew;One cleft the chariot yoke in two.One, in the heat of battle sped,Smote from the neck the driver's head.The poles were rent apart by three;Two broke the splintered axle-tree.Then from the hand of Ráma, whileAcross his lips there came a smile.The twelfth, like thunderbolt impelled,Cut the great hand and bow it held.Then, scarce by Indra's self surpassed,He pierced the giant with the last.The bow he trusted cleft in twain.His driver and his horses slain,Down sprang the giant, mace in hand,On foot against the foe to stand.   The Gods and saints in bright array     Close gathered in the skies,   The prince's might in battle-fray     Beheld with joyful eyes.   Uprising from their golden seats,     Their hands in honour raised,   They looked on Ráma's noble feats,     And blessed him as they praised.

Footnotes
261:1b 'This Asura was a friend of Indra, and taking 
advantage of his friend's confidence, he drank up Indra's 
strength along with a draught of wine and Soma. Indra then told the As'vins and Sarasvatí that Namuchi had drunk up his strength. The As'vins in consequence gave Indra a thunderbolt in the form of a foam, with which he smote off the head of Namuchi.' GARRETT'S Classical Dictionary of India, See also Book I. p. 39.
261:2b Indra.
Next: Canto XXIX.: Khara's Defeat.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIX.: KHARA'S DEFEAT.
When Ráma saw the giant nigh.
On foot, alone, with mace reared high,In mild reproof at first he spoke.Then forth his threatening anger broke:'Thou with the host 'twas thine to lead,With elephant and car and steed,Hast wrought an act of sin and shame,An act which all who live must blame.Know that the wretch whose evil mindThrough the grief of human kind,Through the three worlds confess him lord,Must perish dreaded and abhorred.Night-rover, when a villain's deedsDistress the world he little heeds,Each hand is armed his life to take,And crush him like a deadly snake.The end is near when men beginThrough greed or lust a life of sin,E'en as a Bráhman's dame, unwise,Eats of the fallen hail  
1 and dies.
p. 263
Thy hand has slain the pure and good,

The hermit saints of Dandak wood,
Of holy life, the heirs of bliss;And thou shalt reap the fruit of this.Not long shall they whose cruel breastsJoy in the sin the world detestsRetain their guilty power and pride,But fade like trees whose roots are dried.Yes, as the seasons come and go.Each tree its kindly fruit must show,And sinners reap in fitting timeThe harvest of each earlier crime.As those must surely die who eatUnwittingly of poisoned meat,They too whose lives in sin are spentReceive ere long the punishment.And know, thou rover of the night,That I, a king, am sent to smiteThe wicked down, who court the hateOf men whose laws they violate.This day my vengeful hand shall sendShafts bright with gold to tear and rend,And pass with fury through thy breastAs serpents pierce an emmet's nest.Thou with thy host this day shalt beAmong the dead below, and seeThe saints beneath thy hand who bled,Whose flesh thy cruel maw has fed.They, glorious on their seats of gold,Their slayer shall in hell behold.

Fight with all strength thou callest thine,
Mean scion of ignoble line,Still, like the palm-tree's fruit, this dayMy shafts thy head in dust shall lay.'
Such were the words that Ráma said:
Then Khara's eyes with wrath glowed red,Who, maddened by the rage that burnedWithin him, with a smile returned:
'Thou Das'aratha's son, hast slain
The meaner giants of my train:And canst thou idly vaunt thy mightAnd claim the praise not thine by right?Not thus in self-laudation raveThe truly great, the nobly brave:No empty boasts like thine disgraceThe foremost of the human race.The mean of soul, unknown to fame,Who taint their warrior race with shame,Thus speak in senseless pride as thou,O Raghu's son, hast boasted now,What hero, when the war-dry rings,Vaunts the high race from which he springs,Or seeks, when warriors meet and die.His own descent to glorify?Weakness and folly show confessedIn every vaunt thou utterest,As when the flames fed high with grass

Detect the *simulating* brass,
Dost thou note see me standing hereArmed with the mighty mace I rear,*Firm* as an earth upholding hillWhose summit veins of metal fill?Lo, here I stand before thy faceTo slay thee with my murderous mace,As Death, the universal lord,Stands threatening with his fatal cord.Enough of this. Much more remainsThat should be said: but time constrains.Ere to his rest the sun descend,And shades of night the combat end,The twice seven thousand of my bandWho fell beneath thy bloody handShall have their tears all wiped awayAnd triumph in thy fall to-day.'
He spoke, and loosing from his hold
His mighty mace ringed round with gold,Like some red bolt alive with fireHurled it at Ráma, mad with ire.The ponderous mace which Khara threwSent fiery flashes as it flew.Trees, shrubs were scorched beneath the blast,As onward to its aim it passed.But Ráma, watching as it spedDire as His noose who rules the dead,Cleft it with arrows as it came

On rushing with a hiss and flame.
Its fury spent and burnt away,Harmless upon the ground it layLike a great snake in furious moodBy herbs of numbing power subdued.
Footnotes
262:1 Popularly supposed to cause death.
Next: Canto XXX.: Khara's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXX.: KHARA'S DEATH.
When Ráma, pride of Raghu's race,
Virtue's dear son, had cleft the mace,Thus with superior smile the bestOf chiefs the furious fiend addressed:
'Thou, worst of giant blood, at length
Hast shown the utmost of thy strength,And forced by greater might to bow,Thy vaunting threats are idle now.My shafts have cut thy club in twain:Useless it lies upon the plain,And all thy pride and haughty trustLie with it levelled in the dust.The words that thou hast said to-day,That thou wouldst wipe the tears awayOf all the giants I have slain,My deeds shall render void and vain.Thou meanest of the giants' breed,Evil in thought and word and deed.My hand shall take that life of thineAs Garud 
1 seized the juice divine.
p. 264

Thou, rent by shafts, this day shalt die:
Low on the ground thy corse shall lie,And bubbles from the cloven neckWith froth and blood thy skin shall deck,With dust and mire all rudely dyed,Thy torn arms lying by thy side,While streams of blood each limb shall steep,Thou on earth's breast shalt take thy sleepLike a fond lover when he strainsThe beauty whom at length he gains.Now when thy heavy eyelids closeFor ever in thy deep repose,Again shall Dandak forest beSafe refuge for the devotee.Thou slain, and all thy race who heldThe realm of Janasthán expelled,Again shall happy hermits rove,Fearing no danger, through the grove.Within those bounds, their brethren slain,No giant shall this day remain,But all shall fly with many a tearAnd fearing, rid the saints of fear,This bitter day shall misery bringOn all the race that calls thee king.Fierce as their lord, thy dames shall know,Bereft of joys, the taste of woe.Base, cruel wretch, of evil mind,Plaguer of Bráhmans and mankind,With trembling hands each devotee

Feeds holy tires in dread of thee.'
Thus with wild fury unrepressed
Raghu's brave son the fiend addressed;And Khara, as his wrath grew high,Thus thundered forth his fierce reply:
'By senseless pride to madness wrought,
By danger girt thou fearest naught,Nor heedest, numbered with the dead,What thou shouldst say and leave unsaid.When Fate's tremendous coils enfoldThe captive in resistless hold,He knows not right from wrong, each senseNumbed by that deadly influence.'
He spoke, and when his speech was done
Bent his fierce brows on Raghu's son.With eager eyes he looked aroundIf lethal arms might yet be found.Not far away and full in viewA Sál-tree towering upward grew.His lips in mighty strain compressed,He tore it up with root and crest,With huge arms waved it o'er his headAnd hurled it shouting, Thou art dead.But Ráma, unsurpassed in might.Stayed with his shafts its onward flight,And furious longing seized his soul

The giant in the dust to roll.
Great drops of sweat each limb bedewed,His red eyes showed his wrathful mood.A thousand arrows, swiftly sent,The giant's bosom tore and rentFrom every gash his body showedThe blood in foamy torrents flowed,As springing from their caverns leapSwift rivers down the mountain steep.When Khara felt each deadened powerYielding beneath that murderous shower,He charged, infuriate with the scentOf blood, in dire bewilderment.But Ráma watched, with ready bow,The onset of his bleeding foe,And ere the monster reached him, drewBackward in haste a yard or two.Then from his side a shaft be tookWhose mortal stroke no life might brook:Of peerless might, it bore the nameOf Brahmá's staff, and glowed with flame:Lord Indra, ruler of the skies,Himself had given the glorious prize,His bow the virtuous hero drew,And at the fiend the arrow flew.Hissing and roaring like the blastOf tempest through the air it passed,And fixed, by Ráma's vigour sped,In the foe's breast its pointed head.

Then fell the fiend: the quenchless flame
Burnt furious in his wounded frame.So burnt by Rudra Andhak 
1 fell
In S'vetáranya's silvery dell:So Namuchi and Vritra 
2 died
By steaming bolts that tamed their pride:So Bala 
3 fell by lightning sent
By Him who rules the firmament.
Then all the Gods in close array
With the bright hosts who sing and play,Filled full of rapture and amaze,Sang hymns of joy in Ráma's praise,Beat their celestial drums and shedRain of sweet flowers upon his head.For three short hours had scarcely flown,And by his pointed shafts o'erthrownThe twice seven thousand fiends, whose willCould change their shapes, in death were still,With Tris'iras and Dúshan slain,And Khara, leader of the train.'O wondrous deed,' the bards began,'The noblest deed of virtuous man!Heroic strength that stood alone,And firmness e'en as Vishnu's own!'
Thus having sung, the shining train
Turned to their heavenly homes again.

p. 265
Then the high saints of royal race
And loftiest station sought the place,And by the great Agastya led,With reverence to Ráma said:
'For this, Lord Indra, glorious sire,
Majestic as the burning fire,Who crushes cities in his rage,Sought S'arabhanga's hermitage.Thou wast, this great design to aid,Led by the saints to seek this shade,And with thy mighty arm to killThe giants who delight in ill.Thou Das'aratha's noble son,The battle for our sake hast won,And saints in Dandak's wild who liveTheir days to holy tasks can give.'
Forth from the mountain cavern came
The hero Lakshman with the dame.And rapture beaming from his face.Besought the hermit dwelling-place.Then when the mighty saints had paidDue honour for the victor's aid,The glorious Ráma honoured tooBy Lakshman to his cot withdrew.When Sitá looked upon her lord,

His foemen slain, the saints restored,
In pride and rapture uncontrolledShe clasped him in her loving hold.On the dead fiends her glances fell:She saw her lord alive and well,Victorious after toil and pain,And Janak's child was blest again.Once more, once more with new delightHer tender arms she threwRound Ráma whose victorious mightHad crushed the demon crew.Then as his grateful reverence paidEach saint of lofty soul,O'er her sweet face, all fears allayed,The flush of transport stole.
Footnotes
263:1 Garud the King of Birds, carried off the *Amrit* 
or drink of Paradise from Indra's custody.
264:1 A demon, son of Kas'yap and Diti, slain by Rudra or S'iva when he attempted to carry off the tree of 
Paradise.
264:2 Namuchi and Vritra were two demons slain by 

Indra. Vritra personifies drought, the enemy of Indra, 
who imprisons the rain in the cloud.
264:3 Another demon slain by Indra.
Next: Canto XXXI.: Rávan

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXI.: RÁVAN
But of the host of giants one,
Akampan, from the field had runAnd sped to Lanká 
1 to relate
In Rávan's ear the demons' fate:
'King, many a giant from the shade
Of Janasthán in death is laid:Khara the chief is slain, and ICould scarcely from the battle fly.'
Fierce anger, as the monarch heard,
Inflamed his look, his bosom stirred,And while with scorching glance he eyedThe messenger, he thus replied:
'What fool has dared, already dead,
*Strike* Janasthán, the general dread?
Who is the wretch shall vainly try
In earth, heaven, hell, from me to fly?Vais'ravan 
1b,Indra, Vishnu, He
Who rules the dead, must reverence me;For not the mightiest lord of these

Can brave my will and live at ease.
Fate finds in me a mightier fateTo burn the fires that devastate.With unresisted influence ICan force e'en Death himself to die,With all-surpassing might restrainThe fury of the hurricane,And burn in my tremendous ireThe glory of the sun and fire.'
As thus the fiend's hot fury blazed,
His trembling hands Akampan raised,And with a voice which fear made weak,Permission craved his tale to speak.King Rávan gave the leave he sought,And bade him tell the news he brought.His courage rose, his voice grew bold,And thus his mournful tale he told:
'A prince with mighty shoulders, sprung
From Das'aratha, brave and young,With arms well moulded, bears the nameOf Ráma with a lion's frame.Renowned, successful, dark of limb,Earth has no warrior equals him.He fought in Janasthán and slewDúshan the fierce and Khara too.'
Rávan the giants' royal chief.

Received Akampan's tale of grief.
Then, panting like an angry snake,These words in turn the monarch spake:
'Say quick, did Ráma seek the shade
Of Janasthán with Indra's aid,And all the dwellers in the skiesTo back his hardy enterprise?'
Akampan heard, and straight obeyed
His master, and his answer made.Then thus the power and might he toldOf Raghu's son the lofty-souled:
'Best is that chief of all who know
With deftest art to draw the bow.His are strange arms of heavenly might,And none can match him in the fight.His brother Lakshman brave as he,Fair as the rounded moon to see,With eyes like night and voice that comesDeep as the roll of beaten drums,By Ráma's side stands ever near,Like wind that aids the flame's career.That glorious chief, that prince of kings,On Janasthán this ruin brings.No Gods were there,--dismiss the thoughtNo heavenly legions came and fought.His swift-winged arrows Ráma sent,

Each bright with gold and ornament.
To serpents many-faced they turned:
p. 266
The giant hosts they ate and burned.Where'er these fled in wild dismayRáma was there to strike and slay.By him O King of high estate,Is Janasthán left desolate.'
Akampan ceased: in angry pride
The giant monarch thus replied:'To Janasthán myself will goAnd lay these daring brothers low.'
Thus spoke the king in furious mood;
Akampan then his speech renewed:'O listen while I tell at lengthThe terror of the hero's strength.No power can check, no might can tameRáma, a chief of noblest fame.He with resistless shafts can stayThe torrent foaming on its way.Sky, stars, and constellations, allTo his fierce might would yield and fall.His power could earth itself upholdDown sinking as it sank of old. 
1
Or all its plains and cities drown,

Breaking the wild sea's barrier down;
Crush the great deep's impetuous will,Or bid the furious wind be still.He glorious in his high estateThe triple world could devastate,And there, supreme of men, could placeHis creatures of a new-born race.Never can mighty Ráma beO'vercome in fight, my King, by thee.Thy giant host the day might winFrom him, if heaven were gained by sin.If Gods were joined with demons, theyCould ne'er, I ween, that hero slay,But guile may kill the wondrous man;Attend while I disclose the plan.His wife, above all women graced,Is Sítá of the dainty waist,With limbs to fair proportion true,And a soft skin of lustrous hue,Round neck and arm rich gems are twined:She is the gem of womankind.With her no bright Gandharví vies,No nymph or Goddess in the skies;And none to rival her would dare'Mid dames who part the long black hair.That hero in the wood beguile,And steal his lovely spouse the while.'Reft of his darling wife, be sure,Brief days the mourner will endure.'

With flattering hope of triumph moved
The giant king that plan approved,Pondered the counsel in his breast,And then Akampan thus addressed:'Forth in my car I go at morn,None but the driver with me borne,And this fair Sítá will I bringBack to my city triumphing.'
Forth in his car by asses drawn
The giant monarch sped at dawn,Bright as the sun, the chariot castLight through the sky as on it passed.Then high in air that best of carsTraversed the path of lunar stars,Sending a fitful radiance paleAs moonbeams shot through cloudy veil.Far on his airy way he flew:Near Tádakeya's 
1b grove he drew,
Máricha welcomed him, and placedBefore him food which giants taste,With honour led him to a seat,And brought him water for his feet;And then with timely words addressedSuch question to his royal guest:
'Speak, is it well with thee whose sway
The giant multitudes obey?

I know not all, and ask in fear
The cause, O King, why thou art here.'
Rávan, the giants' mighty king,
Heard wise Máricha's questioning,And told with ready answer, taughtIn eloquence, the cause he sought:'My guards, the bravest of my band.Are slain by Ráma's vigorous hand,And Janasthán, that feared no hateOf foes, is rendered desolate.Come, aid me in the plan I layTo steal the conqueror's wife away.'
Máricha heard the king's request,
And thus the giant chief addressed:
'What foe in friendly guise is he
Who spoke of Sítá's name to thee?Who is the wretch whose thought would bringDestruction on the giants' king?Whose is the evil counsel, say,That bids thee bear his wife away,And careless of thy life provokeEarth's loftiest with threatening stroke?A foe is he who dared suggestThis hopeless folly to thy breast,Whose ill advice would bid thee drawThe venomed fang from serpent's jaw.

By whose unwise suggestion led
Wilt thou the path of ruin tread?Whence falls the blow that would destroyThy gentle sleep of ease and joy?Like some wild elephant is heThat rears his trunk on high,Lord of an ancient pedigree,Huge tusks, and furious eye.Rávan, no rover of the nightWith bravest heart can brook,Met in the front of deadly fight,On Raghu's son to look.
p. 267
The giant hosts were brave and strong,   Good at the bow and spear:But Ráma slew the routed throng,   A lion 'mid the deer.No lion's tooth can match his sword,   Or arrows fiercely shot:He sleeps, he sleeps--the lion lord;   Be wise and rouse him not.O Monarch of the giants, well   Upon my counsel think,Lest thou for ever in the hell   Of Ráma's vengeance sink:A hell, where deadly shafts are sent   From his tremendous-bow,

While his great arms all flight prevent,
   Like deepest mire below:Where the wild floods of battle rave   Above the foeman's head,And each with many a feathery wave   Of shafts is garlanded.O, quench the flames that in thy breast   With raging fury burn;And pacified and self-possessed   To Lanká's town return.Rest thou in her imperial bowers   With thine own wives content,And in the wood let Ráma's hours   With Sitá still be spent.'
The lord of Lanká's isle obeyed
The counsel, and his purpose stayed.Borne on his car he parted thenceAnd gained his royal residence.
Footnotes
265:1 The capital of the giant king Rávan.
265:1b Kuvera, the God of gold

266:1 In the great deluge.
266:1b The giant Máricha, son of Tádaká. Tádaká was 
slain by Ráma. See p. 39.
Next: Canto XXXII.: Rávan Roused.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXII.: RÁVAN ROUSED.
But Súrpanakhá saw the plain
Spread with the fourteen thousand slain,Doers of cruel deeds o'erthrownBy Ráma's mighty arm alone,Add Tris'iras and Dúshan dead,And Khara, with the hosts they led.Their death she saw, and mad with pain,Roared like a cloud that brings the rain,And fled in anger and dismayTo Lanká, seat of Rávan's sway.There on a throne of royal stateExalted sat the potentate,Begirt with counsellor and peer,Like Indra with the Storm-Gods near.Bright as the sun's full splendour shoneThe glorious throne he sat upon,As when the blazing fire is redUpon a golden altar fed.Wide gaped his mouth at every breath,Tremendous as the jaws of Death.With him high saints of lofty thought,Gandharvas, Gods, had vainly fought.The wounds Were on his body yetFrom wars where Gods and demons met.

And scars still marked his ample chest
By fierce Airávat's 1 tusk impressed.
A score of arms, ten necks, had he,His royal gear was brave to see.His massive form displayed each signThat marks the heir of kingly line.In stature like a mountain height,His arms were strong, his teeth were white,And all his frame of massive mouldSeemed lazulite adorned with gold.A hundred seams impressed each *limb*Where Vishnu's arm had wounded him,And chest and shoulder bore the printOf sword and spear and arrow dint,Where every God had struck a blowIn battle with the giant foe.His might to wildest rage could wakeThe sea whose faith naught else can shake,Hurl towering mountains to the earth,And crush e'en foes of heavenly birth.The bonds of law and right he spurned:To others' wives his fancy turned.Celestial arms he used in fight,And loved to mar each holy rite.He went to Bhogavatí's town, 
2
Where Vásuki was beaten down,And stole, victorious in the strife,Lord Takshaka's beloved wife.Kailása's lofty crest he sought,

And when in vain Kuvera fought,
Stole Pushpak thence,the car that throughThe air, as willed the master, flew.Impelled by furious anger, heSpoiled Nandan's 
3 shade and Naliní,
And Chaitraratha's heavenly grove,The haunts where Gods delight to rove.Tall as a hill that cleaves the sky,He raised his mighty arms on highTo check the blessed moon, and stayThe rising of the Lord of Day.Ten thousand years the giant spentOn dire austerities intent.And of his heads an offering, laidBefore the Self-existent, made.No God or fiend his life could take,Gandharva, goblin, bird, or snake:Safe from all fears of death, exceptFrom human arm, that life was kept.Oft when the priests began to raiseTheir consecrating hymns of praise,He spoiled the Soma's sacred juicePoured forth by them in solemn use.
p. 268
The sacrifice his hands o'erthrew,And cruelly the Bráhmans slew.His was a heart that naught oould melt,

Joying in woes which others felt.
She saw the ruthless monster there,
Dread of the worlds, unused to spare.In robes of heavenly texture dressed,Celestial wreaths adorned his breast.He sat a shape of terror, likeDestruction ere the worlds it strike.She saw him in his pride of place,The joy of old Pulastya's 
1 race,
Begirt by counsellor and peer,Rávan, the foeman's mortal fear,And terror in her features shown,The giantess approached the throne.   Then Súrpanakhá bearing yet     Each deeply printed trace   Where the great-hearted chief had set     A mark upon her face,   Impelled by terror and desire,     Still fierce, no longer bold,   To Rávan of the eyes of fire     Her tale, infuriate, told,
Footnotes
267:1 Indra's elephant.

267:2 Bhogavatí, in Pátála in the regions under the 
earth, is the capital of the serpent race whose king is 
Vásuki.
267:3 The grove of Indra.
Next: Canto XXXIII.: Súrpanakhá's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIII.: SÚRPANAKHÁ'S 
SPEECH.
Burning with anger, in the ring
Of counsellors who girt their king,To Rávan, ravener of man,With bitter words she thus began:
'Wilt thou absorbed in pleasure, still
Pursue unchecked thy selfish will:Nor turn thy heedless eyes to seeThe coming fate which threatens thee?The king who days and hours employsIn base pursuit of vulgar joysMust in his people's sight be vileAs fire that smokes on funeral pile.He who when duty calls him sparesNo time for thought of royal cares,Must with his realm and people allInvolved in fatal ruin fall.As elephants in terror shrinkFrom the false river's miry brink,Thus subjects from a monarch fleeWhose face their eyes may seldom see,Who spends the hours for toil ordained

In evil courses unrestrained.
He who neglects to guard and holdHis kingdom by himself controlled,Sinks nameless like a hill whose headIs buried in the ocean's bed.
Thy foes are calm and strong and wise,
Fiends, Gods, and warriors of the skies,--How, heedless, wicked, weak, and vain,Wilt thou thy kingly state maintain?Thou, lord of giants, void of sense,Slave of each changing influence,Heedless of all that makes a king.Destruction on thy head wilt bring.O conquering chief, the prince, who boasts,Of treasury and rule and hosts,By others led, though lord of all,Is meaner than the lowest thrall.For this are monarchs said to beLong-sighted, having power to seeThings far away by faithful eyesOf messengers and loyal spies.But aid from such thou wilt not seek:Thy counsellors are blind and weak,Or thou from these hadst surely knownThy legions and thy realm o'erthrown.Know, twice seven thousand, fierce in might,Are slain by Ráma in the fight,And they, the giant host who led,

Khara and Dúshan, both are dead.
Know, Ráma with his conquering armHas freed the saints from dread of harm,Has smitten Janasthán and madeAsylum safe in Dandak's shade.Enslaved and dull of blinded sight,Intoxicate with vain delight,Thou closest still thy heedless eyesTo dangers in thy realm that rise.A king besotted, mean, unkind,Of niggard hand and slavish mind.Will find no faithful followers heedTheir master in his hour of need.The friend on whom he most relies,In danger, from a monarch flies,Imperious in his high estate,Conceited, proud, and passionate;Who ne'er to state affairs attendsWith wholesome fear when woe impendsMost weak and worthless as the grass,Soon from his sway the realm will pass.For rotting wood a use is found,For clods and dust that strew the ground,But when a king has lost his sway,Useless he falls, and sinks for aye.As raiment by another worn,As faded garland crushed and torn,So is, unthroned, the proudest king,Though mighty once, a useless thing.

But he who every sense subdues
And each event observant views,Rewards the good and keeps from wrong,Shall reign secure and flourish long.Though lulled in sleep his senses lieHe watches with a ruler's eye,Untouched by favour, ire, and hate,And him the people celebrate.O weak of mind, without a trace
p. 269
Of virtues that a king should grace,Who hast not learnt from watchful spyThat low in death the giants lie.Scorner of others, but enchained     By every base desire,   By thee each duty is disdained     Which time and place require.   Soon wilt thou, if thou canst not learn,     Ere yet it be too late,   The good from evil to discern,     Fall from thy high estate.'   As thus she ceased not to upbraid     The king with cutting speech,   And every fault to view displayed,     Naming and marking each,   The monarch of the sons of night,     Of wealth and power possessed,

   And proud of his imperial might,
     Long pondered in his breast. 
Footnotes
268:1 Pulastya is considered as the ancestor of the 
Rakshases or giants, as he is the father of Vis'ravas, the 
father of Rávan and his brethren.
Next: Canto XXXIV.: Sûrpanakhá's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIV.: SÛRPANAKHÁ'S 
SPEECH.
Then forth the giant's fury broke
As Súrpanakhá harshly spoke.Girt by his lords the demon kingLooked on her, fiercely questioning:
'Who is this Ráma, whence, and where?
His form, his might, his deeds declare.His wandering steps what purpose ledTo Dandak forest, hard to tread?What arms are his that he could smiteIn fray the rovers of the nightAnd Tris'iras and Dúshan layLow on the earth, and Khara slay?Tell all, my sister, and declareWho maimed thee thus, of form most fair.'
Thus by the giant king addressed,
While burnt her fury unrepressed,The giantess declared at lengthThe hero's form and deeds and strength:
'Long are his arms and large his eyes:

A black deer's skin his dress supplies.
King Das'aratha's son is he,Fair as Kandarpa's self to see.Adorned with many a golden band,A bow, like Indra's, arms his hand,And shoots a flood of arrows fierceAs venomed snakes to burn and pierce.I looked, I looked, but never sawHis mighty hand the bowstring drawThat sent the deadly arrows out,While rang through air his battle-shout.I looked, I looked, and saw too wellHow with that hail the giants fell,As falls to earth the golden grain,Struck by the blows of Indra's rain.He fought, and twice seven thousand, allTerrific giants, strong and tall,Fell by the pointed shafts o'erthrownWhich Ráma shot on foot, alone.Three little hours had scarcely fled,--Khara and Dúshan both were dead,And he had freed the saints and madeAsylum sure in Dandak's shade.Me of his grace the victor spared,Or I the giants' fate had shared.The high-souled Ráma would not deignHis hand with woman's blood to stain.The glorious Lakshman, justly dear,In gifts and warrior might his peer,

Serves his great brother with the whole
Devotion of his faithful soul:Impetuous victor, bold and wise,First in each hardy enterprise,Still ready by his side to stand,A second self or better hand.And Ráma has a large-eyed spouse,Pure as the moon her cheek and brows,Dearer than life in Ráma's sight,Whose happiness is her delight.With beauteous hair and nose the dameFrom head to foot has naught to blame.She shines the wood's bright Goddess, QueenOf beauty with her noble mien.First in the ranks of women placedIs Sítá of the dainty waist.In all the earth mine eyes have ne'erSeen female form so sweetly fair.Goddess nor nymph can vie with her,Nor bride of heavenly chorister.He who might call this dame his own,Her eager arms about him thrown,Would live more blest in Sítá's loveThan Indra in the world above.She, peerless in her form and faceAnd rich in every gentle grace,Is worthy bride, O King, for thee,As thou art meet her lord to be.I even I, will bring the bride

In triumph to her lover's side--
This beauty fairer than the rest,With rounded limb and heaving breast.Each wound upon my face I oweTo cruel Lakshman's savage blow.But thou, O brother, shalt surveyHer moonlike loveliness to-day,And Ráma's piercing shafts shall smiteThine amorous bosom at the sight.If in thy breast the longing riseTo make thine own the beauteous prize.Up, let thy better foot beginThe journey and the treasure win.If, giant Lord, thy favouring eyesRegard the plan which I advise.Up, cast all fear and doubt awayAnd execute the words I sayCome, giant King, this treasure seek,For thou art strong and they are weak.
p. 270
Let Sítá of the faultless frameBe borne away and be thy dame.Thy host in Janasthán who dwelt   Forth to the battle hied.And by the shafts which Ráma dealt   They perished in their pride.Dúshan and Khara breathe no more,

   Laid low upon the plain.
Arise, and ere the day be o'er   Take vengeance for the slain.'
Next: Canto XXXV.: Rávan's Journey.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXV.: RÁVAN'S JOURNEY.
When Rávan, by her fury spurred,
That terrible advice had heard,He bade his nobles quit his side,And to the work his thought applied.He turned his anxious mind to scanOn every side the hardy plan:The gain against the risk he laid,Each hope and fear with care surveyed,And in his heart at length decreedTo try performance of the deed.Then steady in his dire intentThe giant to the courtyard went.There to his charioteer he cried,'Bring forth the car whereon I ride.'Aye ready at his master's wordThe charioteer the order heard.And yoked with active zeal the bestOf chariots at his lord's behest.Asses with heads of goblins drewThat wondrous car where'er it flew.Obedient to the will it rolledAdorned with gems and glistering gold.Then mounting, with a roar as loudAs thunder from a labouring cloud,

The mighty monarch to the tide
Of Ocean, lord of rivers, hied.White was the shade above him spread,White chouris waved around his head,And he with gold and jewels brightShone like the glossy lazulite.Ten necks and twenty arms had he:His royal gear was good to see.The heavenly Gods' insatiate foe.Who made the blood of hermits flow,He like the Lord of Hills appearedWith ten huge heads to heaven upreared.In the great car whereon he rode,Like some dark cloud the giant showed,When round it in their close arrayThe cranes 'mid wreaths of lightning play.He looked, and saw, from realms of air,The rocky shore of ocean, whereUnnumbered trees delightful grewWith flower and fiuit of every hue.He looked on many a lilied poolWith silvery waters fresh and cool,And shores like spacious altars meetFor holy hermits' lone retreat,The graceful palm adorned the scene,The plantain waved her glossy green,Where grew the sál and betel, thereOn bending boughs the flowers were fair.There hermits dwelt who tamed each sense

By strictest rule of abstinence:
Gandharvas, Kinnars, 1 thronged the place,
Nágas and birds of heavenly race.Bright minstrels of the ethereal quire,And saints exempt from low desire,With Ájas, sons of Brahmá's line,Maríchipas of seed divine,Vaikhánasas and Máshas strayed,And Bálakhilyas 
2 in the shade.
The lovely nymphs of heaven were there,Celestial wreaths confined their hair,And to each form new grace was lentBy wealth of heavenly ornament.Well skilled was each in play and danceAnd gentle arts of dalliance.The glorious wife of many a GodThose beautiful recesses trod,There Gods and Dánavs, all who eatThe food of heaven, rejoiced to meet.The swan and Sáras thronged each bayWith curlews, ducks, and divers gay,Where the sea spray rose soft and whiteO'er rocks of glossy lazulite.As his swift way the fiend pursuedPale chariots of the Gods he viewed,Bearing each lord whose rites austereHad raised him to the heavenly sphere.Thereon celestial garlands hung,There music played and songs were sung.

Then bright Gandharvas met his view,
And heavenly nymphs, as on he flew.He saw the sandal woods below,And precious trees of odorous flow,That to the air around them lentTheir riches of delightful scent;Nor failed his roving eye to markTall aloe trees in grove and park.He looked on wood with cassias filled,And plants which balmy sweets distilled,Where her fair flowers the betel showedAnd the bright pods of pepper glowed.The pearls in many a silvery heapLay on the margin of the deep.And grey rocks rose amid the redOf coral washed from ocean's bed.
p. 271
High soared the mountain peaks that boreTreasures of gold and silver ore,And leaping down the rocky wallsCame wild and glorious waterfalls.Fair towns which grain and treasure held,And dames who every gem excelled,He saw outspread beneath him far,With steed, and elephant, and car.That ocean shore he viewed that showedFair as the blessed Gods' abode

Where cool delightful breezes played
O'er levels in the freshest shade.He saw a fig-tree like a cloudWith mighty branches earthward bowed.It stretched a hundred leagues and madeFor hermit bands a welcome shade.Thither the feathered king of yoreAn elephant and tortoise bore,And lighted on a bough to eatThe captives of his taloned feet.The bough unable to sustainThe crushing weight and sudden strain,Loaded with sprays and leaves of springGave way beneath the feathered king.Under the shadow of the treeDwelt man, a saint and devotee,Ájas, the sons of Brahmá's line,Máshas Maríchipas divine.Vaikhánasas, and all the raceOf Bálakhilyas loved the place.But pitying their sad estateThe feathered monarch raised the weightOf the huge bough, and bore awayThe loosened load and captured prey.A hundred leagues away he sped,Then on his monstrous booty fed,And with the bough he smote the landsWhere dwell the wild Nisháda bands.High joy was his because his deed

From jeopardy the hermits freed.
That pride for great deliverance wroughtA double share of valour brought.His soul conceived the high empriseTo snatch the Amrit from the skies.He rent the nets of iron first,Then through the jewel chamber burst,And bore the drink of heaven awayThat watched in Indra's palace lay.
Such was the hermit-sheltering tree
Which Rávan turned his eye to see.Still marked where Garud sought to rest,The fig-tree bore the name of Blest.
When Rávan stayed his chariot o'er
The ocean's heart-enchanting shore,He saw a hermitage that stoodSequestered in the holy wood.He saw the fiend Marícha thereWith deerskin garb, and matted hairCoiled up in hermit guise, who spentHis days by rule most abstinent.As guest and host are wont to meet,
They met within that lone retreat.
Before the king Márícha placedFood never known to human taste.He entertained his guest with meat

And gave him water for his feet,
And then addressed the giant kingWith timely words of questioning:
'Lord, is "it well with thee, and well
With those in Lanká's town who dwell?What sudden thought, what urgent needHas brought thee with impetuous speed?
The fiend Márícha thus addressed
Rávan the king, his mighty guest,And he, well skilled in arts that guideThe eloquent, in turn replied:
Footnotes
270:1 Beings with the body of a man and the head of a 
horse.
270:2 Ájas, Maríchipas, Vaikhánasas, Máshas, and Bálakhilyas are classes of supernatural beings who lead 
the lives of hermits.
Next: Canto XXXVI.: Rávan's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVI.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.
'Hear me, Márícha, while I speak,
And tell thee why thy home I seek.Sick and distressed am I, and seeMy surest hope and help in thee.Of Janasthán I need not tell,Where Súrpanakhá, Khara dwell,And Dúshan with the arm of might.And Tris'iras, the fierce in fight,Who feeds on human flesh and gore,And many noble giants more,Who roam in dark of midnight throughThe forest, brave and strong and true.By my command they live at easeAnd slaughter saints and devotees.Those twice seven thousand giants, allObedient to their captain's call,Joying in war and ruthless deedsFollow where mighty Khara leads.Those fearless warrior bands who roamThrough Janasthán their forest home,In all their terrible arrayMet Ráma in the battle fray.Girt with all weapons forth they spedWith Khara at the army's head.

The front of battle Ráma held:
With furious wrath his bosom swelled.Without a word his hate to showHe launched the arrows from his bow.On the fierce hosts the missiles came,Each burning with destructive flame,The twice seven thousand fell o'erthrownBy him, a man, on foot, alone.Khara the army's chief and pride,And Dúshan, fearless warrior, died,And Trisiras the fierce was slain,And Dandak wood was free again.
He, banished by his angry sire.
Roams with his wife in mean attire.This wretch, his Warrior tribe's disgraceHas slain the best of giant race.
p. 272
Harsh, wicked, fierce and greedy-souled,A fool, with senses uncontrolled,No thought of duty stirs his breast:He joys to see the world distressed.He sought the wood with fair pretenceOf truthful life and innocence,But his false hand my sister leftMangled, of nose and ears bereft.This Ráma's wife who bears the name

Of Sítá, in her face and frame
Fair as a daughter of the skies,--Her will I seize and bring the prizeTriumphant from the forest shade:For this I seek thy willing aidIf thou, O mighty one, wilt lendThy help and stand beside thy friend,I with my brothers may defyAll Gods embattled in the sky.Come, aid me now, for thine the powerTo succour in the doubtful hour.Thou art in war and time of fear,For heart and hand, without a peer.For thou art skilled in art and wile,A warrior brave and trained in guile.With this one hope, this only aim,O Rover of the Night, I came.Now let me tell what aid I askTo back me in my purposed task.In semblance of a golden deerAdorned with silver spots appear.Go, seek his dwelling: in the wayOf Ráma and his consort stray.Doubt not the lady, when she seesThe wondrous deer amid the trees,Will bid her lord and Lakshman takeThe creature for its beauty's sake.Then when the chiefs have parted thence,And left her lone, without defence,

As Ráhu storms the moonlight, I
Will seize the lovely dame and fly.Her lord will waste away and weepFor her his valour could not keep.Then boldly will I strike the blowAnd wreak my vengeance on the foe.'   When wise Márícha heard the taleHis heart grew faint, his cheek was pale,He stared with open orbs, and triedTo moisten lips which terror dried,And grief, like death, his bosom rentAs on the king his look he bent.   The monarch's will he strove to stay,     Distracted with alarm,   For well he knew the might that lay     In Ráma's matchless arm.   With suppliant hands Marícha stood     And thus began to tell   His counsel for the tyrant's good,     And for his own as well.
Next: Canto XXXVII.: Márícha's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVII.: MÁRÍCHA'S SPEECH.
Márícha gave attentive ear
The ruler of the fiends to hear:Then, trained in all the rules that teachThe eloquent, began his speech:''Tis easy task, O King, to findSmooth speakers who delight the mind.But they who urge and they who doDistasteful things and wise, are few.Thou hast not learnt, by proof untaught,And borne away by eager thought,That Ráma, formed for high emprise,With Varun or with Indra vies.Still let thy people live in peace,Nor let their name and lineage cease,For Ráma with his vengeful handCan sweep the giants from the land.0, let not Janak's daughter bringDestruction on the giant king.Let not the lady Sítá wakeA tempest, on thy head to break.Still let the dame, by care untried,Be happy by her husband's side,Lest swift avenging ruin fallOn glorious Lanká, thee, and all.

Men such as thou with wills unchained,
Advised by sin and unrestrained,Destroy themselves, the king, the state,And leave the people desolate.Ráma, in bonds of duty held,Was never by his sire expelled.He is no wretch of greedy mind,Dishonour of his Warrior kind.Free from all touch of rancorous spite,All creatures' good is his delight.He saw his sire of truthful heartDeceived by Queen Kaikeyí's art,And said, a true and duteous son,'What thou hast promised shall be done.'To gratify the lady's will,His father's promise to fulfil,He left his realm and all delightFor Dandak wood, an anchorite.No cruel wretch, no senseless foolIs Ráma, unrestrained by rule.This groundless charge has ne'er been heard,Nor shouldst thou speak the slanderous word.Ráma in truth and goodness boldIs Virtue's self in human mould,The sovereign of the world confessedAs Indra rules among the Blest.And dost thou plot from him to rendThe darling whom his arms defend?Less vain the hope to steal away

The glory of the Lord of Day.
p. 273
O Rávan, guard thee from the fire
Of vengeful Ráma's kindled ire,--Each spark a shaft with deadly aim,While bow and falchion feed the flame.Cast not away in hopeless strifeThy realm, thy bliss, thine own dear life.O Rávan of his might beware,A God of Death who will not spare.That bow he knows so well to drawIs the destroyer's flaming jaw,And with his shafts which flash and glowHe slays the armies of the foe.Thou ne'er canst win--the thought forego--From the safe guard of shaft and bowKing Janak's child, the dear delightOf Ráma unapproached in might.The spouse of Raghu's son, confessedLion of men with lion chest,--Dearer than life, through good and illDevoted to her husband's will,The slender-waisted, still must beFrom thy polluting touches free.Far better grasp with venturous handThe flame to wildest fury fanned.What, King of giants, canst thou gain

From this attempt so wild and vain?
If in the fight his eye he bendUpon thee, Lord, thy days must end.So life and bliss and royal sway,Lost beyond hope, will pass away.Summon each lord of high estate,And chief, Vibhíshan 
1 to debate.
With peers in lore of counsel triedConsider, reason, and decideScan strength and weakness, count the cost,What may be gained and what be lost.Examine and compare arightThy proper power and Ráma's might,Then if thy weal be still thy care.Thou wilt be prudent and forbear.O giant King, the contest shun,   Thy force is all too weakThe lord of Kosál's mighty son   In deadly fray to seek.King of the hosts that rove at night,   O hear what I advise:My prudent counsel do not slight;   Be patient and be wise.'
Footnotes

273:1 'The younger brother of the giant Rávan; when he 
and his brother had practiced austerities for a long series 
of years, Brahmá appeared to offer them boons: Vibhíshana asked that he might never meditate any unrighteousness.... On the death of Rávan Vibhíshana was installed as Rája of Lanká.' GARRETT'S Classical Dictionary of India.
Next: Canto XXXVIII.: Márícha's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVIII.: MÁRÍCHA'S SPEECH.
"Once in my strength and vigour's pride
I roamed this earth from side to side,And towering like a mountain's crest,A thousand Nágas' 
1b might possessed.
Like some vast sable cloud I showed:My golden armlets flashed and glowed.A crown I wore, an axe I swayed,And all I met were sore afraid.I roved where Dandak wood is spread;On flesh of slaughtered saints I fed.Then Vis'vámitra, sage revered.Holy of heart, my fury feared.To Das'aratha's court he spedAnd went before the king and said: 
2b
'With me, my lord, thy Ráma sendOn holy days his aid to lend.Márícha fills my soul with dreadAnd keeps me sore disquieted.'
The monarch heard the saint's request
And thus the glorious sage addressed:

'My boy as yet in arms untrained
The age of twelve has scarce attained.But I myself a host will leadTo guard thee in the hour of need.My host with fourfold troops complete,The rover of the night shall meet,And I, O best of saints, will killThy foeman and thy prayer fulfil.'The king vouchsafed his willing aid:The saint again this answer made:
'By Ráma's might, and his alone,
Can this great fiend be overthrown.I know in days of yore the BlestThy saving help in fight confessed.Still of thy famous deeds they tellIn heaven above, in earth, and hell,A mighty host obeys thy hest:Here let it still, I pray thee, rest.Thy glorious son, though yet a boy,Will in the fight that fiend destroy.Ráma alone with me shall go:Be happv, victor of the foe.'
He spoke: the monarch gave assent,
And Ráma to the hermit lent.So to his woodland home in joyWent Vis'vámitra with the boy.With ready bow the champion stood

To guard the rites in Dandak wood.
With glorious eyes, most bright to view,Beardless as yet and dark of hue;A single robe his only wear,His temples veiled with waving hair,
p. 274
Around his neck a chain of gold,He grasped the bow he loved to bold;And the young hero's presence madeA glory in the forest shade.Thus Ráma with his beauteous mien,Like the young rising moon was seen,I, like a cloud which tempest brings,My arms adorned with golden rings,Proud of the boon which lent me might,Approached where dwelt the anchorite.But Ráma saw me venturing nigh,Raising my murderous axe on high;He saw, and fearless of the foe,Strung with calm hand his trusty bowBy pride of conscious strength beguiled,I scorned him as a feeble child,And rushed with an impetuous boundOn Vis'vámitra's holy ground.A keen swift shaft he pointed well,The foeman's rage to check and quell,And hurled a hundred leagues away

Deep in the ocean waves I lay.
He would not kill, but, nobly brave,My forfeit life he chose to save.So there I lay with wandering senseDazed by that arrow's violence.Long in the sea I lay: at lengthSlowly returned my sense and strength,And rising from my watery bedTo Lanká's town again I sped.Thus was I spared, but all my bandFell slain by Ráma's conquering hand,--A boy, untrained in warrior skill,Of iron arm and dauntless will.If thou with Ráma still, in spiteOf warning and of prayer, wilt fight,I see terrific woes impend,And dire defeat thy days will end.Thy giants all will feel the blowAnd share the fatal overthrow,Who love the taste of joy and play,The banquet and the festal day.Thine eyes will see destruction takeThy Lanká, lost for Sitá's sake,And stately pile and palace fallWith terrace, dome, and jewelled wall.The good will die: the crime of kingsDestruction on the people brings:The sinless die, as in the lakeThe fish must perish with the snake.

The prostrate giants thou wilt see
Slain for this folly wrought by thee,Their bodies bright with precious scentAnd sheen of heavenly ornament;Or so the remnant of thy trainSeek refuge far, when help is vainAnd with their wives, or widowed, flyTo every quarter of the sky;Thy mournful eyes, where'er they turn,Will see thy stately city burn,When royal homes with fire are red,
And arrowy nets around are spread.
A sin that tops all sins in shameIs outrage to another's dame,A thousand wives thy palace fill,And countless beauties wait thy will.O rest contented with thine own,Nor let thy race be overthrown.If thou, O King, hast still delightIn rank and wealth and power and might,In noble wives, in troops of friends,In all that royal state attends,I warn thee, cast not all away,Nor challenge Ráma to the fray.If deaf to every friendly prayer,   Thou still wilt seek the strife,And from the side of Ráma tear   His lovely Maithil wife,

Soon will thy life and empire end
   Destroyed by Ráma's bow,And thou, with kith and kin and friend,To Yama'a realm must go.'
Footnotes
273:1b Serpent-gods.
273:2b See p. 33.
Next: Canto XXXIX.: Márícha's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIX.: MÁRÍCHA'S SPEECH.
'I told thee of that dreadful day
When Ráma smote and spared to slay.Now hear me, Rávan, while I tellWhat in the after time befell.At length, restored to strength and pride,I and two mighty fiends besideAssumed the forms of deer and strayedThrough Dandak wood in lawn and glade,I reared terrific horns: beneathWere flaming tongue and pointed teeth.I roamed where'er my fancy led,And on the flesh of hermits fed,In sacred haunt, by hallowed tree,Where'er the ritual fires might be.A fearful shape, I wandered throughThe wood, and many a hermit slew.With ruthless rage the saints I killedWho in the grove their tasks fulfilled.When smitten to the earth they sank,Their flesh I ate, their blood I drank,And with my cruel deeds dismayedAll dwellers in the forest shade,Spoiling their rites in bitter hate,With human blood inebriate.

Once in the wood I chanced to see
Ráma again, a devotee,A hermit, fed on scanty fare,Who made the good of all his care.His noble wife was by his side,And Lakshman in the battle tried.In senseless pride I scorned the mightOf that illustrious anchorite,And heedless of a hermit foe,Recalled my earlier overthow.
p. 275
I charged him in my rage and scornTo slay him with my pointed horn,In heedless haste, to fury wroughtAs on my former wounds I thought.Then from the mighty bow he drewThree foe-destroying arrows flew,Keen-pointed, leaping from the string:Swift as the wind or feathered king.Dire shafts, on flesh of foemen fed,Like rushing thunderbolts they sped.With knots well smoothed and barbs well bent,Shot e'en as one, the arrows went.But I who Ráma's might had felt,And knew the blows the hero dealt,Escaped by rapid flight. The twoWho lingered on the spot, he slew.

I fled from mortal danger, freed
From the dire shaft by timely speed.Now to deep thought my days I give,And as a humble hermit live.In every shrub, in every treeI view that noblest devotee.In every knotted trunk I markHis deerskin and his coat of bark,And see the bow-armed Ráma standLike Yama with his noose in hand.I tell thee Rávan, in my frightA thousand Rámas mock my sight,This wood with every bush and boughSeems all one fearful Ráma now.Throughout the grove there is no spotSo lonely where I see him not.He haunts me in my dreams by night,And wakes me with the wild affright.The letter that begins his nameSends terror through my startled frame.The rapid cars whereon we ride,The rich rare jewels, once my pride,Have names  
1 that strike upon mine ear
With hated sound that counsels fear.His mighty strength too well I know,Nor art thou match for such a foe.Too strong were Raghus's son in fightFor Namu*chi or Bali's might.Then Ráma to the battle dare,

Or else be patient and forbear;
But, wouldst thou see me live in peace,Let mention of the hero cease.The good whose holy lives were spentIn deepest thought, most innocent.With all their people many a timeHave perished through another's crime.So in the common ruin, IMust for another's folly die,Do all thy strength and courage can.But ne'er will I approve the plan.For he, in might supremely great,
The giant world could extirpate,
Since, when impetuous Khara soughtThe grove of Janasthán and foughtFor Súrpanakhá's sake, he diedBy Ráma's hand in battle tried.How has he wronged thee? Soothly swear,And Ráma's fault and sin declare.   I warn thee, and my words are wise,     I seek thy people's weal:   But if this rede thou wilt despise.     Nor hear my last appeal,   Thou with thy kin and all thy friends     In fight this day wilt die,   When his great bow the hero bends,     And shafts unerring fly.'

Footnotes
275:1 The Sanskrit words for car and jewels begin with 
ra.
Next: Canto XL.: Rávan's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XL.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.
But Rávan soorned the rede he gave
In timely words to warn and save,E'en as the wretch who hates to liveRejects the herb the leeches give.By fate to sin and ruin spurred,That sage advice the giant heard,Then in reproaches hard and sternThus to Márícha spoke in turn:   'Is this thy counsel, weak and base,Unworthy of thy giant race?Thy speech is fruitless, vain, thy toilLike casting seed on barren soil.No words of thine shall drive me backFrom Ráma and the swift attack.A fool is he, inured to sin.And more, of human origin.The craven, at a woman's callTo leave his sire, his mother, allThe friends he loved, the power and sway.And hasten to the woods away!But now his anger will I rouse,Stealing away his darling spouse.I in thy sight will ravish herFrom Khara's cruel murderer.

Upon this plan my soul is bent,
And naught shall move my firm intent,Not if the way through demons ledAnd Gods with Indra at their head.'Tis thine, when questioned, to explainThe hope and fear, the loss and gain,And, when thy king thy thoughts would know,The triumph or the danger show.A prudent counsellor should wait,And speak when ordered in debate,With hands uplifted, calm and meek,If honour and reward he seek.Or, when some prudent course he seesWhich, spoken, may his king displease
p. 276
He should by hints of dexterous artHis counsel to his lord impart.But prudent words are said in vainWhen the blunt speech brings grief and pain.A high-souled king will scarcely thankThe man who shames his royal rank.Five are the shapes that kings assume,Of majesty, of grace, and gloom:Like Indra now, or Agni, nowLike the dear Moon, with placid brow:Like mighty Varun now they show,Now fierce as He who rules below.

O giant, monarchs lofty-souled
Are kind and gentle, stern and bold,With gracious love their gifts dispenseAnd swiftly punish each offence.Thus subjects should their rulers viewWith all respect and honour due.But folly leads thy heart to slightThy monarch and neglect his right.Thou hast in lawless pride addressedWith bitter words thy royal guest.I asked thee not my strength to scan,Or [*} and profit in the plan.I only spoke to tell the deedO mighty one, by me decreed,And bid thee in the peril lendThy succour in support thy friend.Hear me again, and I will tellHow thou canst aid my venture well.In semblance of a golden deerAdorned with silver drops, appear:And near the cottage in the wayOf Ráma and his consort stray.Draw nigh, and wandering through the brakeWith thy strange form her fancy take.The Maithil dame with wondering eyesWill took upon thy fair disguise,And quickly bid her husband goAnd bring the deer that charms her so,When Raghu's son has left the place,

Still pressing onward in the chase,
Cry out, 'O Lakshman! Ah, mine own!'With voice resembling Ráma's tone.When Lakshman hears his brother's cry,Impelled by Sitá he will fly,Restless with eager love, to aidThe hunter in the distant shade.When both her guards have left her side,Even as Indra, thousand-eyed,Clasps Sachi, will I bear awayThe Maithil dame an easy prey.When thou, my friend, this aid hast lent,Go where thou wilt and live content.True servant, faithful to thy vow,With [*half?} my realm I thee endow.Go forth, may luck thy way attendThat leads thee to the happy end.[I:ii m.,ir v}, will quickly be
In Dandak wood, and follow thee.
So will I cheat this Ráma's eyesAnd win without a blow the prize;And safe return to Lanká's townWith thee, my friend, this day shall crown.But if thou wilt not aid my will,My band this day thy blood shall spill.Yea, thou must share the destined task,For force will take the help I ask.No bliss that rebel's life attends

Whose stubborn will his lord offends.
   Thy life, if thou the task assay,     jeopardy may stand;   Oppose me, and this very day     Thou diest by this hand.   Now ponder all that thou hast heard     Within thy prudent breast:   Reflect with care on every word,     And do what seems the best.'
Next: Canto XLI.: Márícha's Reply.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLI.: MÁRÍCHA'S REPLY.
Against his judgment sorely pressed
By his imperious lord's behest,Márícha threats of death defiedAnd thus with bitter words replied:'Ah, who, my King, with sinful thoughtThis wild and wicked counsel taught,By which destruction soon will fallOn thee, thy sons, thy realm and all?Who is the guilty wretch who seesWith envious eye thy blissful ease,And by this plan, so falsely shown,Death's gate for thee has open thrown!With souls impelled by mean degireThy foes against thy life conspire.They urge thee to destruction's brink,And gladly would they see thee sink.Who with base thought to work thee woeThis fatal road has dared to show,And, triumph in his wicked eye,Would see thee enter io and die!To all thy counsellors, untrue,The punishment of death is due,Who see thee tempt the dangerous way,Nor strain each nerve thy foot to stay.

Wise lords, whose king, by passion led,
The path of sin begins to tread,Restrain him while there yet is time:But thine,--they see nor heed the crime.These by their master's will obtainMirit and fame and joy and gain."Tis only by their master's graceThat servaits hold their lofty place.But when tbc monarch stoops to sinThey lose each joy they strive to win,And all the people people high and lowFall in the common overthrow.
p. 277
Merit and fame and honour spring,Best of the mighty, from the king.So all should strive with heart and willTo keep the king from every ill.Pride, violence, and sullen hateWill ne'er maintain a monarch's state,And those who cruel deeds adviseMust perish when their master dies,Like drivers with their cars o'erthrownIn places rough with root and stone.The good whose holy lives were spentOn duty's highest laws intent,With wives and children many a timeHave perished for another's crime.

Hapless are they whose sovereign lord,
Opposed to all, by all abhorred,Is cruel-hearted, harsh, severe:Thus might a jackal tend the deer.Now all the giant race await,Destroyed by thee, a speedy fate,Ruled by a king so cruel-souled,Foolish in heart and uncontrolled.Think not I fear the sudden blowThat threatens now to lay me low:I mourn the ruin that I seeImpending o'er thy host and thee.Me first perchance will Ráma kill,But soon his hand thy blood will spill.I die, and if by Ráma slainAnd not by thee, I count it gain.Soon as the hero's face I seeHis angry eyes will murder me,And if on her thy hands thou layThy friends and thou are dead this day.If with my help thou still must dareThe lady from her lord to tear,Farewell to all our days are o'er,Lanká and giants are no more.In vain, in vain, an earnest friend,     I warn thee, King, and pray.   Thou wilt not to my prayers attend,     Or heed the words I say   So men when life is fleeting fast

     And death's sad hour is nigh,
   Heedless and blinded to the last     Reject advice and die.'
Next: Canto XLII.: Márícha Transformed.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLII.: MÁRÍCHA TRANSFORMED.
Márícha thus in wild unrest
With bitter words the king addressed.Then to his giant lord in dread,'Arise, and let us go,' he said.'Ah, I have met that mighty lordArmed with his shafts and bow and sword,And if again that bow he bendOur lives that very hour will end.
For none that warrior can provoke
And think to fly his deadly stroke.Like Yama with his staff is he,And his dread hand will slaughter thee.What can I more? My words can findNo passage to thy stubborn mind.I go, great King, thy task to share,And my success attend thee there.'   With that reply and bold consentThe giant king was well content.He strained Márícha to his breastAnd thus with joyful words addressed:'There spoke a hero dauntless still,Obedient to his master's will,Márícha's proper self once more:

Some other took thy shape before.
Come, mount my jewelled car that flies.Will-governed, through the yielding skies,These asses, goblin-faced, shall bearUs quickly through the fields of air.Attract the lady with thy shape,Then through the wood, at will, escape.And I, when she has no defence,Will seize the dame and bear her thence.Again Márícha made reply,Consent and will to signify.With rapid speed the giants twoFrom the calm hermit dwelling flew,Borne in that wondrous chariot, meetFor some great God's celestial seat.They from their airy path looked downOn many a wood and many a town,On lake and river, brook and rill,City and realm and towering hill.Soon he whom giant hosts obeyed,Márícha by his side, surveyedThe dark expanse of Dandak woodWhere Ráma s hermit cottage stood.They left the flying car, whereonThe wealth of gold and jewels shone,And thus the giant king addressedMárícha as his hand he pressed:   'Márícha, look! before our eyesRound Ráma's home the plantains rise.

His hermitage is now in view:
Quick to the work we came to do!'   Thus Rávan spoke, Márícha heardObedient to his master's word,Threw off his giant shape and nearThe cottage strayed a beauteous deer.With magic power, by rapid change.His borrowed form was fair and strange.A sapphire tipped each horn with light;His face was black relieved with white.The turkis and the ruby shedA glory from his ears and head.His arching neck was proudly raised,And lazuares* beneath it blazed.With roseate bloom his flanks were dyed,And lotus tints adorned his hide.His shape was fair*, compact*, and slight;
p. 278
His hoofs--were carven lazulite.His tail with every changing glowDisplayed the hues of Indra's bow.With glossy skin so strangely flecked,With tints of every gem bedecked.A light o'er Ráma's home he sent,And through the wood, where'er he went.The giant clad in that strange dressThat took the soul with loveliness,

To charm the fair Videhan's eyes
With mingled wealth of mineral dyes,Moved onward, cropping in his way,The grass and grain and tender spray,His coat with drops of silver bright,A form to gaze on with delight,He raised his fair neck as he wentTo browse on bud and filament.Now in the Cassia grove he strayed,Now by the cot in plantains' shade.Slowly and slowly on he cameTo catch the glances of the dame,And the tall deer of splendid hueShone full at length in Sítá's view.He roamed where'er his fancy choseWhere Ráma's leafy cottage rose.Now near, now far, in careless ease,He came and went among the trees.Now with light feet he turned to fly,Now, reassured, again drew nigh:Now gambolled close with leap and bound,Now lay upon the grassy ground:Now sought the door, devoid of fear,And mingled with the troop of deer;Led them a little way, and thenceAgain returned with confidence.Now flying far, now turning backEmboldened on his former track,Seeking to win the lady's glance

He wandered through the green expanse.
Then thronging round, the woodland deerGazed on his form with wondering fear;A while they followed where he led,Then snuffed the tainted gale and fled.The giant, though he longed to slayThe startled quarry, spared the prey,And mindful of the shape he woreTo veil his nature, still forbore.Then Sítá of the glorious eye,Returning from her task drew nigh;For she had sought the wood to bringEach loveliest flower of early spring.Now would the bright-eyed lady chooseSome gorgeous bud with blending hues,Now plucked the mango's spray, and nowThe bloom from an As'oka bough.She with her beauteous form, unmeetFor woodland life and lone retreat,That wondrous dappled deer beheldGemmed with rich pearls, unparalleled,His silver hair the lady saw,His radiant teeth and lips and jaw,
And gazed with rapture as her eyes
Expanded in their glad surprise.And when the false deer's glances fellOn her whom Ráma loved so well,He wandered here and there, and cast

A luminous beauty as be passed;
And Janak's child with strange delightKept gazing on the unwonted sight.
Next: Canto XLIII.: The Wondrous Deer.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIII.: THE WONDROUS DEER.
She stooped, her hands with flowers to fill,
But gazed upon the marvel still:Gazed on its back and sparkling sideWhere silver hues with golden vied.Joyous was she of faultless mould,With glossy skin like polished gold.And loudly to her husband criedAnd bow-armed Lakshman by his side:Again, again she called in glee:'O come this glorious creature see;Quick, quick, my lord, this deer to view.And bring thy brother Lakshman too.'As through the wood her clear tones rang,Swift to her side the brothers sprang.With eager eyes the grove they scanned,And saw the deer before them stand.But doubt was strong in Lakshman's breast,Who thus his thought and fear expressed:   'Stay, for the wondrous deer we seeThe fiend Márícha's self may be.Ere now have kings who sought this placeTo take their pastime in the chase,Met from his wicked art defeat,And fallen slain by like deceit.

He wears, well trained in magio guile,
The figure of a deer a while,Bright as the very sun, or placeWhere dwell the gay Gaudharya race.No deer, O Ráma, e'er was seenThus decked with gold und jewels' sheen.'Tis magic, for the world has ne'er,Lord of the world, shown aught so fair.'   But Sítá of the lovely smile,A captive to the giant's wile,Turned Lakshman's prudent speech asideAnd thus with eager words replied:Mv honoured lord, this deer I seeWith beauty rare enraptures me.Go, chief of mighty arm, and bringFor my delight this precious thing.Fair creatures ot the woodland roamUntroubled near our hermit home.The forest cow and stag are there,The fawn, the monkey, and the bear,Where spotted deer delight to play,
p. 279
And strong and beauteous Kinnars  1 stray.
But never, as they wandered by,Has such a beauty charmed mine eyeAs this with limbs so fair and slight,So gentle, beautiful and bright.

O see, how fair it is to view
With jewels of each varied hue:Bright as the rising moon it glows,Lighting the wood where'er it goes.Ah me, what form and grace are there!Its limbs how fine, its hues how fair!Transcending all that words express,It takes my soul with loveliness.O, if thou would, to please me, striveTo take the beauteous thing alive,How thou wouldst gaze with wondering eyesDelighted on the lovely prize!And when our woodland life is o'er,And we enjoy our realm once more,The wondrous animal will graceThe chambers of my dwelling-place,And a dear treasure will it beTo Bharat and the queens and me,And all with rapture and amazeUpon its heavenly form will gaze.But if the beauteous deer, pursued,Thine arts to take it still elude,Strike it, O chieftain, and the akinWill be a treasure, laid within.O, how I long my time to passSitting upon the tender grass,With that soft fell beneath me spreadBright with its hair of golden thread!This strong desire, this eager will,

Befits a gentle lady ill:
But when I first beheld, its lookMy breast with fascination took.See, golden hair its flank adorns,And sapphires tip its branching horns.Resplendent as the lunar way,Or the first blush of opening day,With graceful form and radiant hueIt charmed thy heart, O chieftain, too.'   He heard her speech with willing ear,He looked again upon the deer.Its lovely shape his breast beguiledMoved by the prayer of Janak's child,And yielding for her pleasure's sake,To Lakshman Ráma turned and spake:   'Mark, Lakshman, mark how Sítá's breastWith eager longing is possessed.To-day this deer of wondrous breedMust for his passing beauty bleed,Brighter than e'er in Nandan strayed,Or Chaitraratha's heavenly shade.
How should the groves of earth possess
Such all-surpassing loveliness!The hair lies smooth and bright and fine,Or waves upon each curving line,And drops of living gold bedeckThe beauty of his side and neck.O look, his crimson tongue between

His teeth like flaming fire is seen,
Flashing, whene'er his lips he parts,As from a cloud the lightning darts.O see his sunlike forehead shineWith emerald tints and almandine,While pearly light and roseate glowOf shells adorn his neck below.No eye on such a deer can restBut soft enchantment takes the breast:No man so fair a thing beholdAblaze with light of radiant gold.Celestial, bright with jewels' sheen,Nor marvel when his eyes have seen,A king equipped with bow and shaftDelights in gentle forest craft,And as in boundless woods he straysThe quarry for the venison slays.There as he wanders with his trainA store of wealth he oft may gain.He claims by right the precious ore.He claims the jewels' sparkling store.Such gains are dearer in his eyesThan wealth that in his chamber lies.The dearest things his spirit knows,Dear as the bliss which Sukra chose.But oft the rich expected gainWhich heedless men pursue in vain.The sage, who prudent counsels know,Explain and in a moment show.

This best of deer, this gem of all,
To yield his precious spoils must fall,And tender Sítá by my sideShall sit upon the golden hide.Ne'er could I find so rich a coatOn spotted deer or sheep or goat.No buck or antelope has such,So bright to view, so soft to touch.This radiant deer and one on highThat moves in glory through the sky,Alike in heavenly beauty are,One on the earth and one a star.But, brother, if thy fears be true,And this bright creature that we viewBe fierce Márícha in disguise,Then by this hand he surely dies.For that dire fiend who spurns controlWith bloody hand and cruel soul,Has roamed this forest and dismayedThe holiest saints who haunt the shade.Great archers, sprung of royal race.Pursuing in the wood the chase,Have fallen by his wicked art,And now my shaft shall strike his heart.Vatápi, by his magic power
p. 280
Made heedless saints his flesh devour,

Then, from within their frames he rent
Forth bursting from imprisonment,But once his art in senseless prideUpon the mightiest saint he tried,Agastya's self, and caused him tasteThe baited meal before him placed.Vátápi, when the rite* was o'er,Would take the giant form he wore,But Saint Agastya knew his wileAnd checked the giant with smile'Vatápi, thou with cruel spiteHast conquered many an achoriteThe noblest of the Brahman ask*--And now thy ruin comes at last'Now if my power he thus defies,This giant, like Vatápi dies,Daring to scorn a man like me,A self subduing devotee.Yea, as Agastya slew the foe,My hand shall lay Mancha lowClad in thine arms thy bow in hand,To guard the Maithil lady stand,With watchful eye and thoughtful breastKeeping each word of my behestI go, and hunting through the brakeThis wondrous deer will bring or take.Yea surely I will bring the spoilReturning from my hunter's toilSee, Lakshman how my contort's eyes

Are longing for the lovely prize
This day it falls, that I may winThe treasure of so fair a skin.Do thou and Sítá watch with careLest danger seize you unaware.Swift from my bow one shaft will fly;The stricken deer will fall and dieThen quickly will I stop the gameAnd bring the trophy to my dame.   Jatavus, guardian good and wise,     Our old and faithful friend,   The best and strongest bird that flies,     His willing aid will lend   The Maithil lady well protect,     For every chance provide,   And in thy tender care suspect     A foe on every side.
Footnotes
279:1 A race of beings of human shape but with the 
heads of horses, like centaurs reversed.
Next: Canto XLIV: Artcha's Death

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIV: ARTCHA'S DEATH
Thus having warned his brother hold
He grasped his sword with * gold*And followed with the *** in wentHis wr* *ght and *Then *And *Soon *The *
A while with trembling heart he fled,
The * and showed his stately head.With sword and bow the chief pursuedWhere'or the fleeing deer he viewedSending* from dell* and lone recessThe splendid ** his lovelinessNow full in view the creature stoodNow vanished in the depth of wood;Now running with a languid flight,Now like a meteor lost to sight.With trembling limbs away he sped;Then like the moon with clouds o'erspreadGleamed for a moment bright betweenThe trees, and was again unseenThus in the magic deer's disguise

Mancha lured him to the prize,
And seen a while, then lost to view,Far from his cot the hero drew.Still by the flying game deceivedThe hunter's heart was wroth and grieved,And wearied with the fruitless chaseHe stayed him in a shady place.Again the river of the night*ged the chieftain* full in sight,Slow moving in the coppice near,Surrounded by the woodland deerAgain the hunter sought the gameThat seemed a while to court his aim:But seized again with sudden dread,Beyond his sight the creature fled.Again the hero left the shade,Again the deer before him strayed.With surer hope and stronger willThe hunter longed his prey to kill.Then as his soul impatient grew,An arrow from his side he drew,Besplendent at the sunbeam's glow,The crusher of the smitten foe,With skillful bead the mighty lordFixed well shaft and strained the cord.Upon the deer his eyes he bent,And like a fiery ** wentThe arrow Brahma's self had framed,Alive with sparks that hissed and flamed,

Like Indra's flashing levin, true
To the false deer the missile flewCleaving his flesh that wonderous dartStood quivering in Mancha's heart.Scarce from the ground one foot he sprang,Then stricken fell with deadly pang.Ha* **, as he pressed* the ground,He gave a roar of awful soundAnd *e the wounded giant diedHe threw his borrowed form asideRemembering still his lord's behestHe pondered in his heart how bestSítá's plight ** ** guard away,And Ravan seize the helpless preyThe monster knew the time was nigh.And called aloud with eager cry,'Hi*, Sítá, Lakshman* and the tone
p. 281
He borrowed was like Ráma's own   So by that matchless arrow cleft,The deer's bright form Márícha left,Resumed his giant shape and sizeAnd closed in death his languid eyesWhen Ráma saw his awful foeGasp, smeared with blood, in deadly throe,His anxious thoughts to Sítá sped,And the wise words that Lakshman said,

That this was false Márícha's art,
Returned again upon his heart.He knew the foe he triumphed o'erThe name of great Márícha bore.'The fiend,' he pondered, 'ere has died,'Ho Lakshman! ho, my Sítá!' criedAh, if that cry has reached her ear,How dire must be my darling's fear!And Lakshman of the mighty arm,What thinks he in his wild alarm?As thus he thought in sad surmise,Each startled hair began to rise,And when he saw the giant slainAnd thought upon that cry again,His spirit sank and terror pressedFull sorely on the hero's breastAnother deer he chased and struck.He bore away the the fallen puck,To Janasthán then turned his faceAnd hastened to his dwelling place.
Next: Canto XLV.: Lakshman's Departure.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLV.: LAKSHMAN'S 
DEPARTURE.
But Sitá hearing as she thought,
Her husband's cry with anguish fraught.Called to her guardian, 'Lakshman, runAnd in the wood seek Raghu's son.Scarce can my heart retain its throne,Scarce can my life be called mine own,Assail my powers and senses failAt that long loud and bitter wail.Haste to the wood with all thy speedAnd save thy brother in his needGo, save him in the distant gladeWhere loud he calls, for timely aid.He * beneath some giant foe,A * whom * overthrown'   * to her prayer,* step he stirredObedient to his mother's wordT * Janak's child, with inflamed,* scorn *   Sumitrá's son, a friend ** they brother's foeW* at such ** and neglect *

* Lakshman, * of me
* couldst see,* thy ** thy feet so *
Thou hast no love for Ráma, no
Thy joy is vice thy thoughts are lowHence thus unmoved thou yet canst stayWhile my dear lord is far away.If aught of ill my lord betideWho led thee here, thy chief and guideAh what will be my hapless fateLeft in the wild wood desolate!'   Thus spoke the lady sad with fear.With many a sigh and many a tear,Still trembling like a captured doe:And Lakshman spoke to calm her woe:  'Videhan Queen, be sure of this,--And at the thought thy fear dismiss,--Thy husband's mightier power defiesAll Gods and angels of the skies,Gandharvas, and the sons of light,Serpents, and rovers of the nightI tell thee, of the sons of earth,Of Gods who boast celestial birth,Of beasts and birds and giant hosts,Of demigods, Gandharvas ghosts,Of awful fiends, O thou most fair,There lives not one whose heart would dare

To meet thy Ráma in the fight,
Like Indra's self unmatched in might.Such idle words thou must not sayThy Ráma lives whom none may slay.I will not, cannot leave thee hereIn the wild wood till he be near.The mightiest strength can ne'er withstandHis eager force, his vigorous hand.No, not the triple world alliedWith all the immortal Gods beside.Dismiss thy fear, again take heart,Let all thy doubt and woe depart.Thy lord, be sure, will soon be hereAnd bring thee back that best of deer,Not his, not his that mournful cry,Nor haply came it from the sky.Some giant's art was busy thereAnd framed a castle based on airA precious pledge art thou, consignedTo me by him of noblest mind,Nor can I fairest dame, forsakeThe pledge which Ráma bade me take.Upon our heads, O Queen, we drewThe giants' hate when Ráma slewTheir chieftain Khara, and the shadeOf Janasthán in ruin laid.Through all this mighty wood they roveWith varied cries from grove to groveOn * bent they wander here.

But O dismiss thy causeless fear.'
   Bright flashed her eye as Lashman spokeAnd forth her words of fury brokeUpon her truthful guardian, flungWith bitter taunts that pierced and stung;'Shame on such false compassion, base* of thy glorious race!* joyous sight I ween to thee
p. 282
My lord in direst strait to see.Thou knowest Ráma sore bested,Or word like this thou ne'er hadst said.No marvel if we find such sinIn rivals false to kith and kin.Wretches like thee of evil kind,Concealing crime with crafty mind.Thou, wretch, thine aid wilt still deny,And leave my lord alone to die.Has love of me unnerved thy hand,Or Bharat's art this ruin planned?But be the treachery his or thine,In vain, in vain the base design.For how shall I, the chosen brideOf dark-hued Ráma, lotus-eyed,The queen who once called Ráma mine,To love of other men decline?Believe me, Lakshman, Ráma's wife

Before thine eyes will quit this life,
And not a moment will she stayIf her dear lord have passed away.'   The lady's bitter speech, that stirredEach hair upon his frame, he heard.With lifted hands together laid,His calm reply he gently made:   'No words have I to answer now:My deity, O Queen, art thou.But 'tis no marvel, dame, to findSuch lack of sense in womankind.Throughout this world, O Maithil dame,Weak women's hearts are still the same.Inconstant, urged by envious spite,They sever friends and hate the right.I cannot brook, Videhan Queen,Thy words intolerably keen.Mine ears thy fierce reproaches painAs boiling water seethes the brain.And now to bear me witness allThe dwellers in the wood I call,That, when with words of truth I plead,This harsh reply is all my meed.Ah, woe is thee! Ah, grief, that stillEager to do my brother's will,Mourning thy woman's nature, IMust see thee doubt my truth and die.I fly to Ráma's side, and Oh,May bliss attend thee while I go!

May all attendant wood-gods screen
Thy head from harm, O large-eyed QueenAnd though dire omens meet my sightAnd fill my soul with wild affright,May I return in peace and seeThe son of Raghu safe with thee!'   The child of Janak heard him speak,And the hot tear-drops down her cheek,Increasing to a torrent, ran,Aa thus once more the dame began:'O Lakshman, if I widowed beGodávan's** flood shall cover me,Or I will die by cord, or leap,Life weary, from yon rocky steep;
Or deadly poison will I drink,
Or 'neath the kindled flames will sink,But never, reft of Ráma, canConsent to touch a meaner man.'   The Maithil dame with many sighs,And torrents pouring from her eyes,The faithful Lakshman thus adressed,And smote her hands upon her breast.Sumitrá's son, o'erwhelmed by fears,   Looked on the large-eyed queen:     He saw that flood of burning tears,   He saw that piteous mien.     He yearned sweet comfort to afford,   He strove to soothe her pain

     But to the brother of her lord
  She spoke no word again.     His reverent hands once more he raised,   His head he slightly bent,     Upon her face he sadly gazed,   And then toward Ráma went.
Next: Canto XLVI.: The Guest.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVI.: THE GUEST.
The angry Lakshman scarce could brook
Her bitter words, her furious look.With dark forebodings in his breastTo Ráma's side he quickly pressed.   Then ten necked Rávan saw the timePropitious for his purposed crime.A mendicant in guise he cameAnd stood before the Maithil dame.His garb was red, with tufted hairAnd sandalled feet a shade he bare,And from the fiend's left shoulder slungA staff and water-vessel hung.Near to the lovely dame he drew,While both the chiefs were far from view,As darkness takes the evening airWhen neither sun nor moon is there.He bent his eye upon the dame,A princess fair, of spotless fame:So might some baleful planet beNear Moon-forsaken Rohini.  
1
As the fierce tyrant nearer drew,The trees in Janasthán that grewWaved not a leaf for fear and woe,And the hushed wind forbore to blow.

Godávarí's waters as they fled,
Saw his fierce eye-balls flashing red,And from each swiftly-gliding waveA melancholy murmur gave.Then Rávan, when his eager eyeBeheld the longed-for moment nigh,In mendicant's apparel dressedNear to the Maithil lady pressed.
p. 283
In holy guise, a fiend abhorred,He found her mourning for her lord.Thus threatening draws S'anis'char  
1 nigh
To Chitrá  2 in the evening sky:
Thus the deep well by grass concealedYawns treacherous in the verdant field.He stood and looked upon the dameOf Ráma, queen of spotless fameWith her bright teeth and each fair limbLike the full moon she seemed to him,Sitting within her leafy cot.Weeping for woe that left her not.Thus, while with joy his pulses beat,He saw her in her lone retreat,Eyed like the lotus, fair to viewIn bilken robes of amber hue.Pierced to the core by Káma's dartHe murmured texts with lying art,

And questioned with a soft address
The lady in her loneliness.The fiend essayed with gentle speechThe heart of that fair dame to reach,Pride of the worlds, like Beauty's QueenWithout her darling lotus seen:   'O thou whose silken robes enfoldA form more rare than finest gold,With lotus garland on thy head,Like a sweet spring with bloom o'erspread,Who art thou, fair one, what thy name,Beauty, or Honour, Fortune, Fame,Spirit, or nymph, or Queen of loveDescended from thy home above?Bright as the dazzling jasmine shineThy small square teeth in level line.Like two black stars aglow with lightThine eyes are large and pure and bright.Thy charms of smile and teeth and hairAnd winning eyes, O thou most fair,Steal all my spirit, as the flowOf rivers mines the bank below.How bright, how fine each flowing trees!How firm those orbs beneath thy dress!That dainty waist with ease were spanned,Sweet lady, by a lover's hand.Mine eyes, O beauty, ne'er have seenGoddess or nymph so fair of mien,Or bright Gandharva's heavenly dame,

Or woman of so perfect frame.
In youth's soft prime thy years are few,And earth has naught so fair to view.I marvel one like thee in faceShould make the woods her dwelling-place.Leave, lady, leave this lone retreatIn forest wilds for thee unmeet,Where giants fierce and strong assumeAll shapes and wander in the gloom.These dainty feet were formed to tread
Some palace floor with carpets spread,
Or wander in trim gardens whereEach opening bud perfumes the airThe richest robe thy form should deck,The rarest gems adorn thy neck.The sweetest wreath should bind thy hair,The noblest lord thy bed should share.Art thou akin, O fair of form,To Rudras, 
1b or the Gods of storm, 2b
Or to the glorious Vasus  3b? How
Can less than these be bright as thou?But never nymph or heavenly maidOr Goddess haunts this gloomy shade.Here giants roam, a savage race;What led thee to so dire a place?Here monkeys leap from tree to tree,And bears and tigers wander free;Here ravening lions prowl, and fell

Hyenas in the thickets yell,
And elephants infuriate roam,Mighty and fierce, their woodland home.Dost thou not dread, so soft and fair,Tiger and lion, wolf and bear?Hast thou, O beauteous dame, no fearIn the wild wood so lone and drear?Whose and who art thou? whence and whySweet lady, with no guardian nigh,Dost thou this awful forest treadBy giant bands inhabited?'   The praise the high-souled Rávan spokeNo doubt within her bosom woke. 'His saintly look and Bráhman guiseDeceived the lady's trusting eyes.With due attention on the guestHer hospitable rites she pressed.She bade the stranger to a seat,And gave him water for his feet.The bowl and water-pot he bare,And garb which wandering Bráhmans wear   Forbade a doubt to rise.Won by his holy look she deemedThe stranger even as he seemed   To her deluded eyes.Intent on hospitable care,She brought her best of woodland fare.   And showed her guest a seat.She bade the saintly stranger lave

His feet in water which she gave,
   And sit and rest and eat.He kept his eager glances bentOn her so kindly eloquent,Wife of the noblest king;And longed in heart to steal her thence,Preparing by the dire offence,Death on his head to bring.
p. 284
The lady watched with anxious faceFor Ráma coming from the chase   With Lakshman by his side:But nothing met her wandering glanceSave the wild forest's green expanse   Extending far aud wide.
Footnotes
282:1 The favourite wife of the Moon.
283:1 The planet Saturn.
283:2 Another favourite of the Moon; one of the lunar 
mansions.

283:1b The Rudras, agents in creation, are eight in 
number; they sprang from the forehead of Brahmá.
283:2b Maruts, the attendants of Indra.
283:3b Radiant demi-gods.
Next: Canto XLVII: Rávan's Wooing.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVII: RÁVAN'S WOOING.
As, clad in mendicant's disguise,
He questioned thus his destined prize,She to the seeming saintly manThe story of her life began.'My guest is he,' she thought, 'and I,To 'scape his curse, must needs reply:''Child of a noble sire I springFrom Janak, fair Videha's king.May every good be thine! my nameIs Sítá, Ráma's cherished dame.Twelve winters with my lord I spentMost happily with sweet contentIn the rich home of Raghu's line,And every earthly joy was mine.Twelve pleasant years flew by, and thenHis peers advised the king of men,Ráma, my lord, to consecrateJoint ruler of his ancient state.But when the rites were scarce begun,To consecrate Ikshváku's son,The queen Kaikeyí, honoured dame,Sought of her lord an ancient claim.Her plea of former service pressed,And made him grant her new request,

To banish Ráma to the wild
And consecrate instead her child.This double prayer on him, the bestAnd truest king, she strongly pressed'Mine eyes in sleep I will not close,Nor eat, nor drink, nor take repose.This very day my death shall bringIf Ráma be anointed king.'As thus she spake in envious ire,The aged king, my husband's sire,Besought with fitting words, but sheWas cold and deaf to every plea.As yet my days are few; eighteenThe years of life that I have seen;And Ráma, best of all alive,Has passed of years a score and five-Ráma the great and gentle, throughAll region famed as pure and true,Large-eyed and mighty-armed and tall.With tender heart that cares for all.But Das'aratha, led astrayBy woman's wile and passion's sway,By his strong love of her impelled,The consecrating rites withheld.When, hopeful of the promised grace,My Ráma sought his father's face,The queen Kaikeyí, ill at ease,Spoke to my lord brief words like these:'Hear, son of Raghu, hear from me

The words thy father says to thee:
'I yield this day to Bharat's hand,Free from all foes, this ancient land.Fly from this home no longer thine,And dwell in woods five years and nine.Live in the forest and maintainMine honour pure from falsehood's stain.'Then Ráma spoke, untouched by dread;'Yea, it shall be as thou hast said '.And answered, faithful to his vows,Obeying Das'aratha's spouse:'The offered realm I would not take,But still keep true the words he spake.'Thus, gentle Bráhman, Ráma stillClung to his vow with firmest will.And valiant Lakshman, dear to fame,His brother by a younger dame,Bold victor in the deadly fray,Would follow Ráma on his way.On sternest vows his heart was set,And he, a youthful anchoret,Bound up in twisted coil his hairAnd took the garb which hermits wear;Then with his bow to guard us, heWent forth with Ráma and with me.By Queen Kaikeyí's art bereftThe kingdom and our home we left,And bound by stern religious vowsWe sought this shade of forest boughs.

Now, best of Bráhmans, here we tread
These pathless regions dark and dread.But come, refresh thy soul, and restHere for a while an honoured guest.For he, my lord, will soon be hereWith fresh supply of woodland cheer,Large store of venison of the buck,Or some great boar his hand has struck.Meanwhile, O stranger, grant my prayer:Thy name, thy race, thy birth declare,And why with no companion thouRoamest in Dandak forest now.'Thus questioned Sítá, Ráma's dame.Then fierce the stranger's answer came:'Lord of the giant legions, heFrom whom celestial armies flee,--The dread of hell and earth and sky,Rávan the Rákshas king am I.Now when thy gold-like form I viewArrayed in silks of amber hue,My love, O thou of perfect mould,For all my dames is dead and cold.A thousand fairest women, tornFrom many a land my home adorn.But come, loveliest lady, beThe queen of every dame and me.My city Lanká, glorious town,Looks from a mountain's forehead down

p. 285
Where ocean with his flash and foam
Beats madly on mine island home.With me, O Sítá, shalt thou roveDelighted through each shady grove,Nor shall thy happy breast retainFond memory of this life of pain.In gay attire, a glittering band*,Five thousand maids shall round thee stand,And serve thee at thy beck and sign,If thou, fair Sítá, wilt be mine.'   Then forth her noble passion brokeAs thus in turn the lady spoke:'Me, me the wife of Ráma, himThe lion lord with lion's limb,Strong as the sea, firm as the rock,Like Indra in the battle shook.Tue lord of each auspicious sign,The glory of his princely line,Like some fair Bodh tree strong and tall,The noblest and the best of all,Ráma, the heir of happy fateWho keeps his word inviolate,Lord of the lion gait, possessedOf mighty arm and ample chest,Rama the lion-warrior, himWhose moon bright face no fear can dim,Ráma, his bridled passions' lord,

The darling whom his sire adored,--
Me, me the true and loving dameOf Ráma, prince of deathless fame--Me wouldst, thou vainly woo and press?A jackal woo a lioness!Steal from the sun his glory! suchThy hope Lord Ráma's wife to touch.Ha! Thou hast seen the trees of gold,The sign which dying eyes behold,Thus seeking, weary of thy life,To win the love of Ráma's wife.Fool! wilt thou dare to rend awayThe famished lion's bleeding prey,Or from the threatening jaws to takeThe fang of some envenomed snake?What, wouldst thou shake with puny handMount Mandar, 
1 towering o'er the laud,
Put poison to thy lips and thinkThe deadly cup a harmless drink?With pointed needle touch thine eye,A razor to thy tongue apply,Who wouldst pollute with impious touchThe wife whom Ráma loves so much?Be round thy neck a millstone tied,And swim the sea from side to side;Or raising both thy hands on highPluck sun and moon from yonder sky;Or let the kindled flame be pressed,Wrapt in thy garment, to thy breast;

More wild the thought that seeks to win
Ráma's dear wife who knows not sin.The fool who thinks with idle aimTo gain the love of Rama's dame,With dark and desperate footing makesHis way o'er points of iron stakes.As Ocean to a bubbling spring,The lion to a fox, the kingOf all the birds that ply the wing   To an ignoble crowAs gold to lead of little price,As to the drainings of the riceThe drink they quaff in Paradise,   The Amrit's heavenly flow,As sandal dust with perfume sweetIs to the mire that soils our feet,   A tiger to a cat,As the white swan is to the owl,The peacock to the waterfowl,   An eagle to a bat,Such is my lord compared with thee;And when with bow and arrows he,Mighty as Indra's self shall see   His foeman, armed to slay.Thou, death-doomed like the fly that sipsThe oil that on the altar drips,Shalt cast the morsel from thy lips   And lose thy half-won prey.'

Thus in high scorn the lady flung
The biting arrows of her tongueIn bitter words that pierced and stung   The rover of the night.She ceased. Her gentle cheek grew pale,Her loosened limbs began to fail,And like a plantain in the gale   She trembled with affright.He terrible as Death stood nigh,And watched with fierce exulting eye   The fear that shook her frame.To terrify the lady more,He counted all his triumphs o'er,Proclaimed the titles that he bore,   His pedigree and name.
Footnotes
285:1 The mountain which was used by the Gods as a 
churning stick at the Churning of the Ocean.
Next: Canto XLVIII: Rávan's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVIII: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.
With knitted brow and furious eye
The stranger made his fierce reply;'In me O fairest dame, beholdThe brother of the King of Gold.The Lord of Ten Necks my title, namedRávan, for might and valour famed.Gods and Gandharva hosts I scare;Snakes, spirits, birds that roam the airFly from my coming, wild with fear,Trembling like men when Death is nearVais'ravan once, my brother, wroughtTo ire, encountered me aud fought,
p. 286
But yielding to superior mightFled from his home in sore affright.Lord of the man-drawn chariot, stillHe dwells on famed Kailása's hill.I made the vanquished king resignThe glorious car which now is mine,--Pushpak, the far-renowned, that fliesWill-guided through the buxom skies.Celestial hosts by Indra led

Flee from my face disquieted,
And where my dreaded feet appearThe wind is hushed or breathless is fear.Where'er I stand, where'er I goThe troubled waters cease to flow,Each spell-bound wave is mute and stillAnd the fierce sun himself is chill.Beyond the sea my Lanká standsFilled with fierce forms and giant bands,A glorious city fair to seeAs Indra's Amarávatí.A towering height of solid wall,Flashing afar, surrounds it all,Its golden courts enchant the sight,And gates aglow with lazulite.Steeds, elephants, and cars are there,And drums' loud music fills the air,Fair trees in lovely gardens growWhose boughs with varied fruitage glow.Thou, beauteous Queen, with me shalt dwellIn halls that suit a princess well,Thy former fellows shall forgetNor think of women with regret,No earthly joy thy soul shall miss,And take its fill of heavenly bliss.Of mortal Ráma think no more,Whose terms of days will soon be o'er.King Das'aratha looked in scornOn Ráma though the eldest born,

Sent to the woods the weakling fool,
And set his darling son to ruleWhat, O thou large-eyed dame, hast thouTo do with fallen Ráma now,From home and kingdom forced to fly,A wretched hermit soon to dieAccept thy lover, nor refuseThe giant king who fondly woos.O listen, nor reject in scornA heart by Káma's arrows torn.If thou refuse to hear my prayer,Of grief and coming woe beware;For the sad fate will fall on theeWhich came on hapless Urvas'í,When with her foot she chanced to touchPurúravas, and sorrowed much.  
1
My little finger raised in fightWere more than match for Ráma's mightO fairest, blithe and happy be
With him whom fortune sends to thee.'
   Such were the words the giant said,And Sítá's angry eyes were red.She answered in that lonely placeThe monarch of the giant race:   'Art thou the brother of the LordOf Gold by all the world adored,And sprung of that illustrious seedWouldst now attempt this evil deed?

I tell thee, impious Monarch, all
The giants by thy sin will fall,Whose reckless lord and king thou art,With foolish mind and lawless heart.Yea, one may hope to steal the wifeOf Indra and escape with life.But he who Ráma's dame would tearFrom his loved side must needs despair,Yea, one may steal fair S'achí, dameOf Him who shoots the thunder flame,May live successful in his aim   And length of day may see;But hope, O giant King, in vain,Though cups of Amrit thou may drain,To shun the penalty and pain   Of wronging one like me.'
Footnotes
286:1 The story will be found in GARRETT'S Classical 
Dictionary, See ADDITIONAL NOTES
Next: Canto XLIX.: The Rape of Sitá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIX.: THE RAPE OF SITÁ.
The Rákshas monarch, thus addressed,
His hands a while together pressed,And straight before her startled eyesStood monstrous in his giant size.Then to the lady, with the loreOf eloquence, he spoke once more:'Thou scarce,' he cried, 'hast heard arightThe glories of my power and might,I borne sublime in air can standAnd with these arms upheave the land,Drink the deep flood of Ocean dryAnd Death with conquering force defy.Pierce the great sun with furious dartAnd to her depths cleave earth apart.See, thou whom love and beauty blind,I wear each form as wills my mind."   As thus he spake in burning ire,His glowing eyes were red with fire.His gentle garb aside was thrownAnd all his native shape was shown.Terrific, monstrous, wild, and dreadAs the dark God who rules the dead,His fiery eyes in fury rolled,His limbs were decked with glittering gold.

Like some dark cloud the monster showed,
And his fierce breast with fury glowed.The ten-faced rover of the night,With twenty arms exposed to sight,His saintly guise aside had laidAnd all his giant height displayed.
p. 287
Attired in robes of crimson dyeHe stood and watched with angry eyeThe lady in her bright arrayResplendent as the dawn of dayWhen from the east the sunbeams break,And to the dark-haired lady spake:'If thou would call that lord thine ownWhose fame in every world is known,Look kindly on my love, and beBride of a consort meet for thee.With me let blissful years be spent,For ne'er thy choice shalt thou repent.No deed of mine shall e'er displeaseMy darling as she lives at ease.Thy love for mortal man resign,And to a worthier lord incline.Ah foolish lady, seeming wiseIn thine own weak and partial eyes,By what fair graces art thou heldTo Ráma from his realm expelled?

Misfortunes all his life attend.
And his brief days are near their end.Unworthy prince, infirm of mind!A woman spoke and he resignedHis home and kingdom and withdrewFrom troops of friends and retinue.And sought this forest dark and dreadBy savage beasts inhabited.'Thus Rávan urged the lady meetFor love, whose words were soft and sweet.Near and more near the giant pressedAs love's hot fire inflamed his breast.The leader of the giant crewHis arm around the lady threw:Thus Budha  
1 with ill-omened might
Steals Rohini's delicious light.One hand her glorious tresses grasped,One with its ruthless pressure claspedThe body of his lovely prize,The Maithil dame with lotus eyes.The silvan Gods in wild alarmMarked his huge teeth and ponderous arm,And from that Death-like presence fled,Of mountain size and towering head.Then seen was Rávan's magic carAglow with gold which blazed afar,--The mighty car which asses drewThundering as it onward flew.He spared not harsh rebuke to chide

The lady as she moaned and cried,
Then with his arm about her waistHis captive in the car he placed.In vain he threatened: long and shrillRang out her lamentation still,O Ráma! which no fear could stay:But her dear lord was far awayThen rose the fiend, and toward the skiesBore his poor helpless struggling prize:
Hurrying through the air above
The dame who loathed his proffered loveSo might a soaring eagle bearA serpent's consort through the air.As on he bore her through the skyShe shrieked aloud her bitter cry.As when some wretch's lips complainIn agony of maddening pain;'O Lakshman, thou whose joy is stillTo do thine eider brother's will,This fiend, who all disguises wears,From Ráma's side his darling tears.Thou who couldst leave bliss, fortune, all,Yea life itselt at duty's call,Dost thou not see this outrage doneTo hapless me, O Raghu's son?'Tis thine, O victor of the foe,To bring the haughtiest spirit low,How canst thou such an outrage see

And let the guilty fiend go free?
Ah, seldom in a moment's timeComes bitter fruit of sin and crime,But in the day of harvest painComes like the ripening of the grain.So thou whom fate and folly leadTo ruin for this guilty deed,Shalt die by Ráma's arm ere longA dreadful death for hideous wrong.Ah, too successful in their endsAre Queen Kaikeyí and her friends,When virtuous Ráma, dear to fame,Is mourning for his ravished dame.Ah me, ah me! a long farewellTo lawn and glade and forest dellIn Janasthán's wild region, whereThe Cassia trees are bright and fairWith all your tongues to Ráma sayThat Rávan bears his wife away.Farewell, a long farewell to thee,O pleasant stream Godávari,Whose rippling waves are ever stirredBy many a glad wild water bird!All ye to Ráma's ear relateThe giant's deed and Sítá's fata.O all ye Gods who love this groundWhere trees of every leaf abound,Tell Ráma I am stolen hence,I pray you all with reverence.

On all the living things beside
That these dark boughs and coverts hide,Ye flocks of birds ye troops of deer,I call on you my prayer to hear.All we to Ráma's ear proclaimThat Rávan tears away his dameWitn forceful arms--his darling wife,Dearer to Ráma than his life.O, if he knew I dwelt in hell,My mighty lord, I know full well,Would bring me, conqueror, back to-day,Though Yama's self reclaimed his prey.'Thus from the air the lady sent
p. 288
With piteous voice her last lament,And as she wept she chanced to seeThe vulture on a lofty tree.As Rávan bore her swiftly by,On the dear bird she bent her eye,And with a voice which woe made faintRenewed to him her wild complaint:'O see, the king who rules the raceOf giants, cruel, fierce and base,Rávan the spoiler bears me henceThe helpless prey of violence.This fiend who roves in midnight shadeBy thee, dear bird, can ne'er be stayed,

For he is armed and fierce and strong
Triumphant in the power to wrong.For thee remains one only task,To do, kind friend, the thing I ask.To Ráma's ear by thee be borneHow Sítá from her home is torn,And to the valiant Lakshman tellThe giant's deed and what befell.'
Footnotes
287:1 Mercury: to be carefully distinguished hum 
Buddha.
Next: Canto L.: Jatáyus.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO L.: JATÁYUS.
The vulture from his slumber woke
And heard the words which Sítá spoke.He raised his eye and looked on her,Looked on her giant ravisher.That noblest bird with pointed beak,Majestic as a mountain peak,High on the tree addressed the kingOf giants, wisely counselling:'O Ten-necked lord, I firmly holdTo faith and laws ordained of old,And thou, my brother, shouldst refrainFrom guilty deeds that shame and stain.The vulture king supreme in air,Jatayus is the name I bear.Thy captive, known by Sítá's name,Is the dear consort and the dameOf Ráma Das'aratha's heir,Who makes the good of all his care.Lord of the world in might he viesWith the great Gods of seas and skies.The law he boasts to keep allowsNo king to touch another's spouse,And, more than all, a prince's dameHigh honour and respect may claim.

Back to the earth thy way incline,
Nor think of one who is not thine.Heroic souls should hold it shameTo stoop to deeds which others blame,And all respect by them is shownTo dames of others as their own.Not every case of bliss and gainThe Scripture's holy texts explain,And subjects, when that light is dim,Look to their prince and follow him.The king is bliss and profit, heIs store of treasures fair to see,And all the people's fortunes spring,Their joy and misery, from the king.If, lord of giant race, thy mindBe fickle, false, to sin inclined,How wilt thou kingly place retain?High thrones in heaven no sinners gain.The soul which gentle passions swayNe'er throws its nobler part away,Nor ill the mansion of the baseLong be the good man's dwelling-place.Prince Ráma, chief of high renown,Has wronged thee not in field or town.Ne'er has he sinned against thee: howCanst thou resolve to harm him now?If moved by S'úrpankhá's prayerThe giant Khara sought him there,And fighting fell with baffled aim,

His and not Ráma's is the blame.
Say, mighty lord of giants, sayWhat fault on Ráma canst thou lay?What has the world's great master doneThat thou should steal his precious one?Quick, quick the Maithil dame release;Let Ráma's consort go in peace,Lest scorched by his terrific eyeBeneath his wrath thou fall and dieLike Vritra when Lord Indra threwThe lightning flame that smote and slew.Ah fool, with blinded eyes to takeHome to thy heart a venomed snake!Ah foolish eyes, too blind to seeThat Death's dire coils entangle thee!The prudent man his strength will spare,Nor lift a load too great to bear.Content is he with wholsome foodWhich gives him life and strength renewedBut who would dare the guilty deedThat brings no fame or glorious meed,Where merit there is none to winAnd vengeance soon o'ertakes the sin?My course of life, Pulastya's son,For sixty thousand years has run.Lord of my kind I still maintainMine old hereditary reign.I, worn by years, am older farThan thou, young lord of bow and car,

In coat of glittering mail encased
And armed with arrows at thy waist,But not unchallenged shalt thou go,Or steal the dame without a blow.Thou canst not, King, before mine eyesHear off unchecked thy lovely prize,Safe as the truth of Scripture bentBy no close logic's argument.Stay if thy courage let thee, stayAnd meet me in the battle fray,And thou shalt stain the earth with goreFalling as Khara fell before.Soon Ráma, clothed in bark shall smite.
p. 289
Thee, his proud foe, in deadly fight,--Ráma, from whom have oft times fledThe Daitya hosts discomfited.No power have I to kill or slay:The princely youths are far away,But soon shalt thou with fearful eyeStruck down beneath their arrows lie,But while I yet have life and sense,Thou shalt not, tyrant, carry henceFair Sítá, Ramá's honoured queen,With lotus eyes and lovely mien.Whate'er the pain, whate'er the cost,Though in the struggle life be lost,

The will of Raghu's noblest son
And Das'aratha must be done.Stay for a while, O Rávan, stay,One hour thy flying car delay,And from that glorious chariot thouShalt fall like fruit from shaken bough,For I to thee, while yet I live,The welcome of a foe will give.'
Next: Canto LI.: The Combat.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LI.: THE COMBAT.
Rávan's red eyes in fury rolled:
Bright with his armlets' flashing gold,In high disdain, by passion stirredHe rushed against the sovereign bird.With clash and din and furious blowsOf murderous battle met the foes:Thus urged by winds two clouds on highMeet warring in the stormy sky.Then fierce the dreadful combat ragedAs fiend and bird in war engaged,As if two winged mountains spedTo dire encounter overhead.Keen pointed arrows think and fast,In never ceasing fury cast,Rained hurtling on the vulture kingAnd smote him on the breast and wing.But still that noblest bird sustainedThe cloud of shafts which Rávan rained,And with strong beak and talons' bentThe body of his foeman rent.Then wild with rage the ten-necked kingLaid ten swift arrows on his string,-Dread as the staff of Death were they,So terrible and keen to slay,

Straight to his ear the string he drew,
Straight to the mark the arrows flew,And pierced by every iron headThe vulture's mangled body bled.One glance upon the car he bentWhere Sítá wept with shrill lament,Then heedless of his wounds and painRushed at the giant king again.Then the brave vulture with the strokeOf his resistless talons brokeThe giant's shafts and bow whereonThe fairest pearls and jewels shone.The monster paused by rage unmanned:A second bow soon armed his hand.Whence pointed arrows swift and trueIn hundreds, yea in thousands, flew.The monarch of the vultures, pliedWith ceaseless darts on every side.Showed like bird that turns to restClose covered by the branch-built nest.He shook his pinions to repelThe storm of arrows as it fell;Then with his talons snapped in twoThe mighty bow which Rávan drew,Next with terrific wing he smoteSo fiercely on the giant's coat,The harness, glittering with the glowOf fire, gave way beneath the blow.With storm of murderous strokes he beat

The harnessed asses strong and fleet,-
Each with a goblin's monstrous faceAnd plates of gold his neck to grace.Then on the car he turned his ire,-The will-moved car that shone like fire,And broke the glorious chariot, brokeThe golden steps and pole and yoke.The chouris and the silken shadeLike the full moon to view displayed,Together with the guards who heldThose emblems, to the ground he felled.The royal vulture hovered o'erThe driver's head, and pierced and toreWith his strong beak and dreaded clawsHis mangled brow and cheek and jaws.With broken car and sundered bow,His charioteer and team laid low,One arm about the lady wound,Sprang the fierce giant to the ground.Spectators of the combat, allThe spirits viewed the monster's fall:Lauding the vulture every oneCried with glad voice, Well done! well done!But weak with length of days, at lastThe vulture's strength was failing fast.The fiend again assayed to bearThe lady through the fields of air.But when the vulture saw him riseTriumphant with his trembling prize,

Bearing the sword that still was left
When other arms were lost or cleft,Once more, impatient of repose,Swift from the earth her champion rose,Hung in the way the fiend would take,And thus addressing Rávan spake:'Thou, King of giants, rash and blind,Wilt be the ruin of thy kind,Stealing the wife of Ráma, himWith lightning sears on chest and limb.A mighty host obeys his willAnd troops of slaves his palace fill;
p. 290
His lords of state are wise and true,Kinsmen has he and retinue.As thirsty travellers drain the cup,Thou drinkest deadly poison up.The rash and careless fool who heedsNo coming fruit of guilty deeds,A few short years of life shall see,And perish doomed to death like thee.Say whither wilt thou fly to looseThy neck from Death's entangling noose.Caught like the fish that finds too lateThe hook beneath the treacherous bait?Never, O King--of this be sure--Will Raghu's fiery sons endure,

Terrific in their vengeful rage,
This insult to their hermitage.Thy guilty hands this day have doneA deed which all reprove and shun,Unworthly of a noble chief,The pillage loved by coward thief.Stay, if thy heart allow thee, stayAnd meet me in the deadly fray.Soon shall thou stain the earth with gore,And fall as Khara fell before.The fruits of former deeds o'erpowerThe sinner in his dying hour:And such a fate on thee, O King,Thy tyranny and madness bring.Not e'en the Self-existent Lord,Who reigns by all the worlds adored,Would dare attempt a guilty deedWhich the dire fruits of crime succeed.'   Thus brave Jatayus, best of birds,Addressed the fiend with moving words,Then ready for the swift attackSwooped down upon the giant's back.Down to the bone the talons wentWith many a wound the flesh was rent:Such blows infuriate drivers dealTheir elephants with pointed steel.Fixed in his back the strong beak lay,The talons stripped the flesh away.He fought with claws and beak and wing.

And tore the long hair of the king.
Still as the royal vulture beatThe giant with his wings and feet,Swelled the fiend's lips, his body shookWith furious rage too great to brook.About the Maithil dame he castOne huge left aim and held her fast.In furious rage to frenzy fannedHe struck the vulture with his hand.Jatáyus mocked the vain assay,And rent his ten left arms away.Down dropped the severed limbs: anewTen others from his body grew:Thus bright with pearly radiance glideDread serpents from the hillock side,Again in wrath the giant pressedThe lady closer to his breast,And foot and fist sent blow on blowIn ceaseless fury at the foe.So fierce and dire the battle, wagedBetween those mighty champions, raged;Here was the lord of giants, thereThe noblest of the birds of air.Thus, as his love of Ráma taught,The faithful vulture strove and fought.But Rávan seized his sword and smoteHis wings and side and feet and throat.At mangled side and wing he bled;He fell, and life was almost fled.

The lady saw her champion lie,
His plumes distained with gory dye,And hastened to the vulture's sideGrieving as though a kinsman died.The lord of Lanká's island viewed     The vulture as he lay:   Whose back like some dark cloud was hued,     His breast a paly grey,   Like ashes, when by none renewed.     The flame has died away.   The lady saw with mournful eye,     Her champion press the plain,--   The royal bird, her true ally     Whom Rávan's might had slain.   Her soft arms locked in strict embrace     Around his neck she kept.   And lovely with her moon-bright face     Bent o'er her friend and wept,
Next: Canto LII.: Rávan's Flight.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LII.: RÁVAN'S FLIGHT.
Fair as the lord of silvery rays
Whom every star in heaven obeys,The Maithil dame her plaint renewedO'er him by Rávan's might subdued:'Dreams, omens, auguries foreshowOur coming lot of weal and woe:But thou, my Ráma, couldst not seeThe grievous blow which falls on thee.The birds and deer desert the brakesAnd show the path my captor takes,And thus e'en now this royal birdFlew to mine aid by pity stirred.Slain for my sake in death he lies,The broad-winged rover of the skies.O Ráma, haste, thine aid I crave:O Lakshman, why delay to save?Brave sons of old Ikshváku, hearAnd rescue in this hour of fear.'   Her flowery wreath was torn and rent,Crushed was each sparkling ornament.She with weak arms and trembling kneesClung like a creeper to the trees,And like some poor deserted thingWith wild shrieks made the forest ring.

But swift the giant reached her side,
p. 291
As loud on Ráma's name she cried.
Fierce as grim Death one hand he laidUpon her tresses' lovely braid.That touch, thou impious King, shall beThe ruin of thy race and thee.The universal world in aweThat outrage on the lady saw.All nature shook convulsed with dread,And darkness o'er the land was spread.The Lord of Day grew dark and chill,And every breath of air was still.The Eternal Father of the skyBeheld the crime with heavenly eye.And spake with solemn voice, 'The deed,The deed is done, of old decreed.'Sad were the saints within the grove,But triumph with their sorrow strove.They wept to see the Maithil dameEndure the outrage, scorn, and shame:They joyed because his life should payThe penalty incurred that day.Then Rávan raised her up, and bareHis captive through the fields of air,Calling with accents loud and shrillOn Ráma and on Lakshman still.With sparkling gems on arm and breast,

In silk of paly amber dressed,
High in the air the Maithil dameGleamed like the lightning's flashing flame.The giant, as the breezes blewUpon her robes of amber hue,And round him twined that gay attire,Showed like a mountain girt with fire.The lady, fairest of the fair,Had wreathed a garland round her hair;Its lotus petals bright and sweetRained down about the giant's feet.Her vesture, bright as burning gold,Gave to the wind each glittering fold,Fair as a gilded cloud that gleamsTouched by the Day-God's tempered beams.Yet struggling in the fiend's embrace,The lady with her sweet pure face,Far from her lord, no longer woreThe light of joy that shone before.Like some sad lily by the sideOf waters which the sun has dried;Like the pale moon uprising throughAn autumn cloud of darkest hue,So was her perfect face betweenThe arms of giant Rávan seen:Fair with the charm of braided tressAnd forehead's finished loveliness;Fair with the ivory teeth that shedWhite lustre through the lips' fine red,

Fair as the lotus when the bud
Is rising from the parent flood.With faultless lip and nose and eye.Dear as the moon that floods the skyWith gentle light, of perfect mould,She seemed a thing of burnished gold,
Though on her cheek the traces lay
Of tears her hand had brushed away,But as the moon-beams swiftly fadeEre the great Day-God shines displayed,So in that form of perfect graceStill trembling in the fiend's embrace,From her beloved Ráma reft,No light of pride or joy was left.The lady with her golden hueO'er the swart fiend a lustre threw,As when embroidered girths enfoldAn elephant with gleams of gold.Fair as the lily's bending stemHer arms adorned with many a gem,A lustre to the fiend she lentGleaming from every ornament,As when the cloud-shot flashes lightThe shadows of a mountain height.Whene'er the breezes earthward boreThe tinkling of the zone she wore,He seemed a cloud of darkness hueSending forth murmurs as it flew.

As on her way the dame was sped
From her sweet neck fair flowers were shed,The swift wind caught the flowery rainAnd poured it o'er the fiend again.The wind-stirred blossoms, sweet to smell,On the dark brows of Rávan fell,Like lunar constellations setOn Meru for a coronet.From her small foot an anklet fairWith jewels slipped, and through the air,Like a bright circlet of the flameOf thunder, to the valley came.The Maithil lady, fair to seeAs the young leaflet of a treeClad in the tender hues of spring,Flashed glory on the giant king,As when a gold-embroidered zoneAround an elephant is thrown.While, bearing far the lady, throughThe realms of sky the giant flew,She like a gleaming meteor castA glory round her as she passed.Then from each limb in swift descentDropped many a sparkling ornament:On earth they rested dim and paleLike fallen stars when virtues fail. 
1
Around her neck a garland layBright as the Star-God's silvery ray:It fell and flashed like Gangá sent

From heaven above the firmament. 2
The birds of every wing had flocked
To stately trees by breezes rocked:
p. 292
These bowed their wind-swept heads andsaid:'My lady sweet, be comforted.'With faded blooms each brook withinWhose waters moved no gleamy fin,Stole sadly through the forest dellMourning the dame it loved so well.From every woodland region nearCame lions, tigers, birds, and deer,And followed, each with furious look,The way her flying shadow took.For Sítá's loss each lofty hillWhose tears were waterfall, and rill,Lifting on high each arm-like steep,Seemed in the general woe to weep.When the great sun, the lord of day,Saw Rávan tear the dame away,His glorious light began to failAnd all his disk grew cold and pale.'If Rávan from the forest hies**With Ráma's Sítá as his prize,Justice and truth have vanished hence,Honour and right and innocence.'

Thus rose the cry of wild despair
From spirits as they gathered there.In trembling troops in open lawnsWept, wild with woe, the startled fawns,And a strange terror changed the eyesThey lifted to the distant skies.On silvan Gods who love the dellA sudden fear and trembling fell,As in the deepest woe they viewedThe lady by the fiend subdued.Still in loud shrieks was heard afarThat voice whose sweetness naught couldmar,While eager looks of fear and woeShe bent upon the earth below.The lady of each winning wileWith pearly teeth and lovely smile,Seized by the lord of Lanká's isle,   Looked down for friends in vain.She saw no friend to aid her, none,Not Ráma nor the younger sonOf Das'aratha, and undone   She swooned with fear and pain.
Footnotes
291:1 The spirits of the good dwell in heaven until their 

store of accumulated merit is exhausted. Then they 
redescend to earth in the form of falling stars.
291:2 See The Descent of Gangá, Book I Canto XLIV.
Next: Canto LIII.: Sitá's Threats.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIII.: SITÁ'S THREATS.
Soon as the Maithil lady knew
That high through air the giant flew,Distressed with grief and sore afraidHer troubled spirit sank dismayed.Then, as anew the waters welledFrom those red eyes which sorrow swelled,Fresh in keen words her passion broke,And to the fierce-eyed fiend she spoke:
'Canst thou attempt a deed so base.
Untroubled by the deep disgrace.--To steal me from my home and fly,When friend or guardian none was nigh!Thy craven soul that longed to steal,Fearing the blows that warriors deal.Upon a magic deer reliedTo lure my husband from my side,Friend of his sire, the vulture kingLies low on earth with mangled wing,Who gave his aged life for meAnd died for her he sought to free.Ah, glorious strength indeed is thine,Thou meanest of thy giant line,Whose courage dared to tell thy name

And conquer in the fight a dame.
Does the vile deed that thou hast doneCause thee no shame, thou wicked one--A woman from her home to rendWhen none was near his aid to lend?Through all the worlds, O giant King,The tidings of this deed will ring,This deed in law and honour's spiteBy one who claims a hero's might.Shame on thy boasted valour, shame!Thy prowess is an empty name,Shame, giant, on this cursed deedFor which thy race is doomed to bleed!Thou fliest swifter than the gale,For what can strength like thine avail?Stay for one hour, O Rávan, stay;Thou shalt not flee with life away.Soon as the royal chieftains' sightFalls on the thief who roams by night,Thou wilt not, tyrant, live one hourThough backed by all thy legions' power,Ne'er can thy puny strength sustainThe tempest of their arrowy rain:Have e'er the trembling birds withstoodThe wild flames raging in the wood?Hear me, O Rávan, let me go,And save thy soul from coming woe.Or if thou wilt not not me free,Wroth for this insult done to me.

With his brave brother's aid my lord
Against thy life will raise his sword.A guilty hope inflames thy breastHis wife from Ráma's home to wrest.Ah fool, the hope thou hast is vain;Thy dreams of bliss shall end in pain!If torn from all I love by theeMv godlike lord no more I see,Soon will I die and end my woes,Nor live the captive of my foes,.Ah fool, with blinded eyes to chooseThe evil and the good refuse!So the sick wretch with stubborn willTurns fondly to the **cates that kill,And madly draws his lips awayFrom medicine that would check decay.About thy neck securely wound
p. 293
The deadly coil of Fate is bound,And thou, O Ravan, dost not fearAlthough the hour of death is near.With death-doomed sight thine eyes beholdThe gleaming of the trees of gold,--See dread Vaitarani, the floodThatt rolls a stream of foamy blood,--See the dark wood by all abhorred--Its every leaf a threatening sword.

The tangled thickets thou shall tread
Where thorns with iron points are spread,For never can thy days be long,Base plotter of this shame and wrongTo Ráma of ihe lofty soul:He dies who drinks the poisoned bowl.The coils of death around thee lie:They hold thee and thou canst not fly.Ah whither, tyrant, wouldst thou runThe vengeance of my lord to shun?By his unaided arm aloneWere twice seven thousand fiends o'er-thrown:Yes, in the twinkling of an eyeHe forced thy mightiest fiends to die.And shall that lord of lion heart,Skilled in the bow and spear and dart,Spare thee, O fiend, in battle strife,The robber of his darling wife?'   These were her words, and more beside,By wrath and bitter hate supplied.Then by her woe and fear o'erthrownShe wept again and made her moan.As long she wept in grief and dread,Scarce conscious of the words she said,The wicked giant onward fled   And bore her through the air.As firm he held the Maithil dame,Still wildly struggling, o'er her frameWith grief and bitter misery came

   The trembling of despair.
Next: Canto LIV.: Lanká.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIV.: LANKÁ.
He bore her on in rapid flight,
And not a friend appeared in sight.But on a hill that o'er the woodRaised its high top five monkeys stood.From her fair neck her scarf she drew,And down the glittering vesture flew.With earring, necklet, chain, and gem,Descending in the midst of them:'For these,' she thought,'my path may show,And tell my lord the way I go.'Nor did the fiend, in wild alarm,Mark when she drew from neck and armAnd foot the gems and gold, and sentTo earth each gleaming ornament.
The monkeys raised their tawny eyes
That closed not in their first surprise,And saw the dark-eyed lady, hereShe shrieked above them in the air.High o'er their heads the giant passedHolding the weeping lady fast.O'er Pampa's flashing flood he spedAnd on to Lanka's city fled.He bore awny in senseless joy

The prize that should his life destroy,
Like the rash fool who hugs beneathHis robe a snake with venomed teeth,Swift as an arrow from a bow,Speeding o'er lands that lay below,Sublime in air his course he tookO'er wood and rook and lake and brook.He passed at length the sounding seaWhere monstrous creatures wander free,--Seat of Lord Varun's ancient reign,Controller of the eternal main.The angry waves were raised and tossedAs Rávan with the lady crossed,And fish and snake in wild unrestShowed flashing fin and gleaming crest.Then from the blessed troops who dwellIn air celestial voices fell:'O ten-necked King,' they cried, 'attend:This guilty deed will bring thine end.'   Then Rávan speeding like the storm,Bearing his death in human form,The struggling Sítá, lighted downIn royal Lanka's glorious town;A city bright and rich, that showedWell-ordered street and noble road;Arranged with just division, fairWith multitudes in court and square.Thus, all his journey done, he passedWithin his royal home at last.

There in a queenly bower he placed
The black-eyed dame with dainty waist:Thus in her chamber Maya laidThe lovely Maya, demon maid.Then Rávan gave command to allThe dread she-fiends who filled the halls'This captive lady watch and guardFrom sight of man and woman barred.But all the fair one asks besideBe with unsparing hand supplied:As though 'twere I that asked, withholdNo pearls or dress or gems or gold.And she among you that shall dareOf purpose or through want of careOne word to vex her soul to say,'Throws her unvalued life away.'   Thus spake the monarch of their raceTo those she-fiends who thronged the place,And pondering on the course to takeWent from the chamber as he spake.He saw eight giants, strong and dread,On flesh of bleeding victims fed,Proud in the boon which Brahma gave,
p. 294
And trusting in its power to save.He thus the mighty chiefs addressedOf glorious power and strength possessed:

'Arm, warriors, with the spear and bow;
With all your speed from Lanká go,For Janasthán, our own no more,Is now defiled with giants' gore;The seat of Khara's royal stateIs left unto us desolate.In your brave hearts and might confide,And cast ignoble fear aside.Go, in that desert region dwellWhere the fierce giants fought and fell.A glorious host that region held,For power and might unparalleled,By Dúshan and brave Khara led,-All, slain by Ráma's arrows, bled.Hence boundless wrath that spurns controlReigns paramount within my soul,And naught but Ráma's death can sateThe fury of my vengeful hate.I will not close my slumbering eyesTill by this hand my foeman dies.And when mine arm has slain the foeWho laid those giant princes low,Long will I triumph in the deed,Like one enriched in utmost need.Now go; that I this end may gain,In Janasthán. O chiefs, remain.Watch Ráma there with keenest eye,And all his deeds and movements spy.Go forth, no helping art neglect,

Be brave and prompt and circumspect,
And be your one endeavour stillTo aid mine arm this foe to kill.Oft have I seen your warrior mightProved in the forehead of the fight,And sure of strength I know so wellSend you in Janasthán to dwell.'   The giants heard with prompt assent     The pleasant words he said,   And each before his master bent     For meet salute, his head.   Then as he bade, without delay,     From Lanká's gate they passed,   And hurried forward on their way     Invisible and fast.
Next: Canto LV.: Sítá In Prison.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LV.: SÍTÁ IN PRISON.
Thus Rávan his commandment gave
To those eight giants strong and brave,So thinking in his foolish prideAgainst all dangers to provide.Then with his wounded heart aflameWith love he thought upon the dame,And took with hasty steps the way
To the fair chamber where she lay,
He saw the gentle lady thereWeighed down by woe too great to bear,Amid the throng of fiends who keptTheir watch around her as she wept:A pinnace sinking neath the waveWhen mighty winds around her rave:A lonely herd-forsaken deer,When hungry dogs are pressing near,Within the bower the giant passed:Her mournful looks were downward cast.As there she lay with streaming eyesThe giant bade the lady rise,And to the shrinking captive showedThe glories of his rich abode,Where thousand women spent their days

In palaces with gold ablaze;
Where wandered birds of every sort,And jewels flashed in hall and court.Where noble pillars charmed the sightWith diamond and lazulite,And others glorious to beholdWith ivory, crystal, silver, gold.There swelled on high the tambour's sound,And burnished ore was bright aroundHe led the mournful lady whereResplendent gold adorned the stair,And showed each lattice fair to seeWith silver work and ivory:Showed his bright chambers, line on line,Adorned with nets of golden twine.Beyond he showed the Maithil dameHis gardens bright as lightning's flame,And many a pool and lake he showedWhere blooms of gayest colour glowed.Through all his home from view to viewThe lady sunk in grief he drew.Then trusting in her heart to wakeDesire of all she saw, he spake:'Three hundred million giants, allObedient to their master's call,Not counting young and weak and old,Serve me with spirits fierce and bold.A thousand culled from all of theseWait on the lord they long to please.

This glorious power, this pomp and sway,
Dear lady, at thy feet I lay:Yea, with my life I give the whole,O dearer than my life and soul.A thousand beauties fill my hall:Be thou my wife and rule them all.O hear my supplication! whyThis reasonable prayer deny?Some pity to thy suitor show,For love's hot flames within me glow.This isle a hundred leagues in length,Encompassed by the ocean's strength,Would all the Gods and fiends defyThough led by Him who rules the sky.No God in heaven, no sage on earth,No minstrel of celestial birth,
p. 295
No spirit in the worlds I seeA match in power and might for me.What wilt tbou do with Ráma, himWhose days are short, whose light is dim,Expelled from home and royal sway,Who treads on foot his weary way?Leave the poor mortal to his fate.And wed thee with a worthier mate.My timid love, enjoy with meThe prime of youth before it flee.

Do not one hour the hope retain
To look on Ráma's face again.For whom would wildest thought beguileTo seek thee in the giants' isle?Say who is he has power to bindIn toils of net the rushing wind.Whose is the mighty hand will tameAnd hold the glory of the flame?In all the worlds above, below.Not one, O fair of form, I knowWho from this isle in fight could rendThe lady whom these arms defend.Fair Queen, o'er Lanka's island reign,Sole mistress of the wide domain.Gods, rovers of the night like me,And all the world thy slaves will be.O'er thy fair brows and queenly headLet conscerating balm be shed,And sorrow banished from thy breast,Enjoy my love and take thy rest.Here never more thy soul shall knowThe memory of thy former woe,And here shall thou enjoy the meedDeserved by every virtuous deed.Here garlands glow of flowery twine,With gorgeous hues and scent divine.Take gold and gems and rich attire:Enjoy with me thy heart's desire.There stand, of chariots far the best,

The car my brother once possessed.
Which, victor in the stricken field,I forced the Lord of Gold to yield.'Tis wide and high and nobly wrought,Bright as the sun and swift as thought.Therein O Sítá, shalt tbou rideDelighted by thy lover's side.But sorrow mars with lingering traceThe splendour of thy lotus face.A cloud of woe is o'er it spread,And all the light of joy is fled.'   The lady, by her woe distressed,One corner of her raiment pressedTo her sad cheek like moonlight clear.And wiped away a falling tear.The rover of the night renewedHis eager pleading as he viewedThe lady stand like one distraught,Striving to fix her wandering thought:' Think not, sweet Lady, of the shameOf broken vows, nor fear the blame.The Saints approve with favouring eyes
This union knit with marriage ties.
O beauty, at thy radiant feetI lay my heads, and thus entreat.One word of grace, one look I crave:Have pity on thy prostrate slave.These idle words I speak are vain,

Wrung forth by love's consuming pain,
And ne'er of Rávan be it saidHe wooed a dame with prostrate head.'Thus to the Maithil lady suedThe monarch of the giant brood,And 'She is now mine own,' he thought,In Death's dire coils already caught.
Next: Canto LVI.: Sítá's Disdain.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVI.: SÍTÁ'S DISDAIN.
His words the Maithil lady heard
Oppressed by woe but undeterred.Fear of the fiend she cast aside,And thus in noble scorn replied:'His word of honour never stainedKing Das'aratha nobly reigned,The bridge of right, the friend of truth.His eldest son, a noble youth,Is Ráma, virtue's faithful friend,Whose glories through the worlds extend.Long arms and large full eyes has he,Mv husband, yea a God to me.With shoulders like the forest king's,From old Ikshváku's line he springs.He with his brother Lakshman's aidWill smite thee with the vengeful blade.Hadst thou but dared before his eyesTo lay thine hand upon the prize,Thou stretched before his feet hadst lainIn Janasthán like Khara slain.Thy boasted rovers of the nightWith hideous shapes and giant might,--Like serpents when the feathered kingSwoops down with his tremendous wing,--

Will find their useless venom fail
When Ráma's mighty arms assail.The rapid arrows bright with gold.Shot from the bow he loves to hold.Will rend thy frame from flank to flankAs Gangá's waves erode the bank.Though neither God nor fiend have powerTo slay thee in the battle hour,Yet from his hand shall come thy fate,Struck down before his vengeful hate.That mighty lord will strike and endThe days of life thou hast to spend.Thy days are doomed, thy life is spedLike victim's to the pillar led.Yea, if the glance of Ráma brightWith fury on thy form should light,Thou scorched this day wouldst fall and die
p. 296
Like Káma slain by Rudra's eye. 1
He who from heaven the moon could throw,Or bid its bright rays cease to glow,--He who could drain the mighty seaWill set his darling Sítá freeFled is thy life, thy glory, fledThy strength and power: each sense is dead.Soon Lanká widowed by thy guiltWill see the blood of giants spilt.

This wicked deed, O cruel King,
No triumph, no delight will bring.Thou with outrageous might and scornA woman from her lord hast torn.My glorious husband far away,Making heroic strength his stay,Dwells with his brother, void of fear,In Dandak forest lone and drear.No more in force of arms confide:That haughty strength, that power and prideMy hero with his arrowy rainFrom all thy bleeding limbs will drain.When urged by fate's dire mandate, nighComes the fixt hour for men to die.Caught in Death's toils their eyes are blind,And folly takes each wandering mind.So for the outrage thou hast doneThe fate is near thou canst not shun,--The fate that on thyself and allThy giants and thy town shall fall.I spurn thee: can the altar dightWith vessels for the sacred rite,O'er which the priest his prayer has said,Be sullied by an outcaste's tread?So me, the consort dear and trueOf him who clings to virtue too,Thy hated touch shall ne'er defile,Base tyrant lord of Lanká's isle.Can the white swan who floats in pride

Through lilies by her consort's side,
Look for one moment, as they pass,On the poor diver in the grass?This senseless body waits thy will.To torture, chain, to wound or kill.I will not, King of giants, striveTo keep this fleeting soul aliveBut never shall they join the nameOf Sítá with reproach and shame.   Thus as her breast with fury burnedHer bitter speech the dame returned.Such words of rage and scorn, the lastShe uttered, at the fiend she castHer taunting speech the giant heard,And every hair with anger stired,Then thus with fury in his eyeHe made in threats his fierce reply'Hear Maithil lady, hear my speech* to my words and ponder each* thy head twelve months shall fly
And thou thy love wilt still deny,
My cooks shall mince thy flesh with steelAnd serve it for my morning meal.'   Thus with terrific threats to herSpake Rávan, cruel ravener.Mad with the rage her answer wokeHe called the fiendish train and spoke:'Take her, ye Rákshas dames, who fright

With hideous form and mien the sight,
Who make the flesh of men your food,--And let her pride be soon subdued.'He spoke, and at his word the bandOf fiendish monsters raised each handIn reverence to the giant king,And pressed round Sítá in a ring.Rávan once more with stern behestTo those she-fiends his speech addressed:Shaking the earth beneath his tread,He stamped his furious foot and said:'To the As'oka garden bearThe dame, and guard her safely thereUntil her stubborn pride be bentBy mingled threat and blandishment.See that ye watch her well, and tame,Like some she-elephant, the dame.'   They led her to that garden whereThe sweetest flowers perfumed the air,Where bright trees bore each rarest fruit,And birds, enamoured, ne'er were mute.Bowed down with terror and distress,Watched by each cruel giantess,--Like a poor solitary deerWhen ravening tigresses are near,--The hapless lady lay distraughtLike some wild thing but newly caught,And found no solace, no reliefFrom agonizing fear and grief;

Not for one moment could forget
Each terrifying word and threat,Or the fierce eyes upon her set   By those who watched around.She thought of Ráma far away,She mourned for Lakshman as she layIn grief and terror and dismay   Half fainting on the ground.
Footnotes
296:1 See Book I Caato XXV
Next: Canto LVII.: Sítá Comforted.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVII.: SÍTÁ COMFORTED.
Soon as the fiend had set her down
Within his home in Lanká's townTriumph and joy filled Indra's breast,Whom thus the Eternal Sire addressed:   'This deed will free the worlds from woeAnd cause the giants' overthrow.The fiend has borne to Lanká's isleThe body of the * smile,True consort * to happy fateW * and dedicate
p. 297
She looks and longs for Ráma's face,But sees a crowd of demon race,And guarded by the giant's trainPines for her lord and weeps in vain,But Lanká founded on a steepIs girdled by the mighty deep,And how will Ráma know his fairAnd blameless wife is prisoned there?She on her woe will sadly broodAnd pine away in solitude,And heedless of herself, will cease

To live, despairing of release.
Yes, pondering on her fate, I seeHer gentle life in jeopardy.Go, Indra, swiftly seek the place,And look upon her lovely face.Within the city make thy way:Let heavenly food her spirit stay.'   Thus Brahma, spake: and He who slewThe cruel demon Páka, flewWhere Lanká's royal city lay,And Sleep went with him on his way.'Sleep,' cried the heavenly Monarch, 'closeEach giant's eye in deep repose.'   Thus Indra spoke, and Sleep fulfilledWith joy his mandate, as he willed,To aid the plan the Gods proposed,The demons' eyes in sleep she closed.Then Sachi's lord, the Thousand-eyed,To the Asoka garden hied.He came and stood where Sitá lay,And gently thus began to say:'Lord of the Gods who hold the sky,Dame of the lovely smile, am I.Weep no more, lady, weep no more;Thy days of woe will soon be o'er.I come, O Janak's child, to beThe helper of thy lord and thee.He through my grace, with hosts to aid,This sea-girt land will soon invade.

'Tis by my art that slumbers close
The eyelids of thy giant foes.Now I, with Sleep, this place have sought,Videhau lady, and have broughtA gift of heaven's ambrosial foodTo stay thee in thy solitude.Receive it from my hand, and taste,O lady of the dainty waist:For countless ages thou shall beFrom pangs of thirst and hunger free.'   But doubt within her bosom wokeAs to the Lord of Gods she spoke:'How may I know for truth that thouWhose form I see before me nowArt verily the King adoredBy heavenly Gods, and S'achi's lord?With Rhagu's sons I learnt to knowThe certain signs which Godhead show.These marks before mine eyes displayIf o'er the Gods thou bear the sway.'   The heavenly lord of S'achi heard.And did according to her word,Above the ground his feet were raised;With eyelids motionless he gazed.No dust upon his raiment lay,And his bright wreath was fresh and gay.Nor was the lady's glad heart slowThe Monarch of the Gods to know.And while the tears unceasing ran

From her sweet eyes she thus began:
'My lord has gained a friend in thee,And I this day thy presence seeShown clearly to mine eyes, as whenRáma and Lakshman, lords of men.Beheld it, and their sire the king,And Janak too from whom I spring.Now I, O Monarch of the Blest,Will eat this food at thy behest,Which thou hast brought me, of thy grace,To aid and strengthen Raghu's race.'   She spoke, and by his words relieved,The food from Indra's hand received,Yet ere she ate the balm he brought.On Lakshman and her lord she thought.'If my brave lord be still alive,If valiant Lakshman yet survive,May this my taste of heavenly foodBring health to them and bliss renewed!'     She ate, and that celestial food   Stayed hunger, thirst, and lassitude,     And all her strength restored.   Great joy her hopeful spirit stirred   At the glad tidings newly heard      Of Lakshman and her lord.   And Indra's heart was joyful too:   He bade the Maithil dame adieu,     His saving errand done.   With Sleep beside him parting thence

   He sought his heavenly residence
     To prosper Raghu's son.
Next: Canto LVIII.: The Brothers' Meeting.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVIII.: THE BROTHERS' 
MEETING.
When Ráma's deadly shaft had struck
The giant in the seeming buck.The chieftain turned him from the placeHis homeward way again to trace.Then as he hastened onward, fainTo look upon his spouse again,Behind him from a thicket nighRang out a jackal's piercing cry.Alarmed he heard the startling shriekThat raised his hair and dimmed his cheek,And all his heart was filled with doubtAs the shrill jackal's cry rung out:'Alas, some dire disaster seemsPortended by the jackal's screams.O may the Maitil dame be screenedFrom outrage of each hungry fiend!
p. 298
Alas, if Lakshman chanced to hearThat bitter cry of woe and fearWhat time Márícha, as he died,

With voice that mocked my accents cried,
Swift to my side the prince would fleeAnd quit the dame to succour me.Too well I see the demon bandThe slaughter of my love have planned.Me far from home and Sítá's viewThe seeming deer Márícha drew.He led me far through brake and dellTill wounded by my shaft he fell,And as he sank rang out his cry,'O save me, Lakshman, or I die.'May it be well with both who stayedIn the great wood with none to aid,For every fiend is now my foeFor Janasthán's great overthrow,And many an omen seen to-dayHas filled my heart with sore dismay.'   Such were the thoughts and sad surmiseOf Ráma at the jackal's cries,And all his heart within him burnedAs to his cot his steps he turned.He pondered on the deer that ledHis feet to follow where it fled,And sad with many a bitter thoughtHis home in Janasthán he sought.His soul was dark with woe and fearWhen flocks of birds and troops of deerMove round him from the left, and raisedDiscordant voices as they gazed.

The omens which the chieftain viewed
The terror of his soul renewed,When lo, to meet him Lakshman spedWith brows whence all the light had fled.Near and more near the princes came,Each brother's heart and look the same;Alike on each sad visage layThe signs of misery and dismay,Then Ráma by his terror movedHis brother for his fault reprovedIn leaving Sítá far from aidIn the wild wood where giants strayed.Lakshman's left hand be took, and thenIn gentle tones the prince of men,Though sharp and fierce their tenour ran,Thus to his brother chief began:   'O Lakshman, thou art much to blameLeaving alone the Maíthil dame,And flying hither to my side:O, may no ill my spouse betide!But ah. I know my wife is dead,And giants on her limbs have fed,So strange, so terrible are allThe omens which my heart appal.O Lakshman, may we yet returnThe safety of my love to learn.To find the child of Janak stillAlive and free from scathe and ill!Each bird with notes of warning screams,

Though the hot sun still darts his beams.
The moan of deer, the jackal's yellOf some o'erwhelming misery tell.O mighty brother, still may she.My princess, live from danger free!That semblance of a golden deer     Allured me far away,   I followed nearer and more near,     And longed to take the prey.   I followed where the quarry fled:     My deadly arrow flew,   And as the dying creature bled,     The giant met my view.   Great tear and pain oppress my heart     That dreads the coming blow,   And through my left eye keenly dart     The throbs that herald woe.   Ah Lakshman, all these signs dismay,     My soul that sinks, with dread,   I know my love is torn away,     Or, haply, she is dead.'
Next: Canto LIX.: Ráma's Return.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIX.: RÁMA'S RETURN.
When Ráma saw his brother stand
With none beside him, all unmanned,Eager he questioned why he cameSo far without the Maíthil dame:'Where is my wife, my darling, sheWho to the wild wood followed me?Where hast thou left my lady, whereThe dame who chose my lot to share?Where is my love who balms my woeAs through the forest wilds I go,Unkinged and banished and disgraced,--My darling of the dainty waist?She nerves my spirit for the strife,She, only she gives zest to life,Dear as my breath is she who viesIn charms with daughters of the skies.If Janak's child be mine no more,In splendour fair as virgin ore,The lordship of the skies and earthTo me were prize of little worth.Ah, lives she yet, the Maíthil dame,Dear as the soul within this frame?O, let not all my toil be vain,The banishment, the woe and pain!

O, let not dark Kaikeyí win
The guerdon of her teacherous sin,If, Sítá lost, my days I end,And thou without me homeward wend!O, let not good Kaus'alyá shedHer bitter tears to mourn me dead,Nor her proud rival's hest obey,Strong in her son and queenly sway!Back to my cot will I repairIf Sítá live to greet me there,
p. 299
But if my wife have perished, IReft of ray love will surely die,O Lakshman, if I seek my cot,Look for my love and find her notSweet welcome with her smile to give,I tell thee, I will cease to live.O answer,--let thy words be plain,--Lives Sita yet, or is she slain?'Didst thou thy sacred trust betrayTill ravening giants seized the prey?Ah me, so young, so soft and fair,Lapped in all bliss, untried by care,Rent from her own dear husband, howWill she support her misery now?That voice, O Lakshman smote thine ear,And filled, I ween, thy heart with fear,

When on thy name for succour cried
The treacherous giant ere he died.That voice too like mine own, I ween,Was heard by the Videhan queen.She bade thee seek my side to aid,And quickly was the hest obeyed,But ah, thy fault I needs must blame,To leave alone the helpless dame,And let the cruel giants sateThe fury of their murderous hate.Those blood-devouring demons allGrieve in their souls for Khara's fall,And Sítá, none to guard her side.Torn by their cruel hands has died.I sink, O tamer of thy foes,Deep in the sea of whelming woes.What can I now? I must endureThe mighty grief that mocks at cure.'   Thus, all his thoughts on Síta bent,To Janasthán the chieftain went,Hastening on with eager stride,And Lakshman hurried by his side.With toil and thirst and hunger worn,His breast with doubt and anguish torn,   He sought the well-known spot.Again, again he turned to chideWith quivering lips which terror dried:   He looked, and found her not.Within his leafy home he sped,

Each pleasant spot he visited
   Where oft his darling strayed.'Tis as I feared', he cried, and there,Yielding to pangs too great to bear,   He sank by grief dismayed.
Next: Canto LX.: Lakshman Reproved.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LX.: LAKSHMAN REPROVED.
But Ráma ceased not to upbraid.
His brother for untimely aid,And thus, while anguish wrung his breast,The chief with eager question pressed:'Why, Lakshman, didst thou hurry henceAnd leave my wife without defence?I left her in the wood with thee.And deemed her safe from jeopardy.When first thy form appeared in view,I marked that Sítá come not too.With woe my troubled soul was rent,Prophetic of the dire event.Thy coming steps afar I spied,I saw no Sítá by thy side.And felt a sudden throbbing dartThrough my left eye, and arm, and heart.'   Lakshman, with Fortune's marks impressed,His brother mournfully addressed:'Not by my heart's free impulse led,Leaving thy wife to thee I sped;But by her keen reproaches sent,O Ráma, to thine aid I went.She heard afar a mournful cry,'O save me, Lakshman, or I die.'

The voice that spoke in moving tone
Smote on her ear and seemed thine own.Soon as those accents reached her earShe yielded to her woe and fear,She wept o'ercome by grief, and cried,'Fly, Lakshman, fly to Ráma's side.'Though many a time she bade me speed,Her urgent prayer I would not heed.I bade her in thy strength confide,And thus with tender words replied:'No giant roams the forest shadeFrom whom thy lord need shrink dismayed.No human voice, believe me, spokeThose words thy causeless fear that woke.Can he whose might can save in woeThe heavenly Gods e'er stoop so low,And with those piteous accents callFor succour like a caitiff thrall?And why should wandering giants chooseThe accents of thy lord to use,In alien tones my help to crave,And cry aloud. O Lakshman, save?Now let my words thy spirit cheer.Compose thy thoughts and banish fear.In hell, in earth, or in the skiesThere is not, and there cannot riseA champion whose strong arm can slayThy Ráma in the battle fray.To heavenly hosts he ne'er would yield

Though Indra led them to the field.
To soothe her thus I vainly sought:Her heart with woe was still distraught.While from her eyes the waters ranHer bitter speech she thus began:'Too well I see thy dark intent:Thy lawless thoughts on me are bent.Thou hopest, but thy hope is vain,To win my love, thy brother slain.Not love, but Bharat's dark decreeTo share his exile counselled thee,
p. 300
Or hearing now his bitter cryThou surely to his aid wouldst fly.For love of me, a stealthy foeThou choosest by his side to go,And now thou longest that my lordShould die, and wilt no help afford.'   Such were the words the lady said:With angry fire my eyes were red.With pale lips quivering in my rageI hastened from the hermitage.'He ceased; and frenzied by his painThe son of Raghu spoke again:'O brother, for thy fault I grieve,The Maithil dame alone to leave.Thou knowest that my arm is strong

To save me from the giant throng,
And yet couldst leave the cottage, spurredTo folly by her angry word.For this thy deed I praise thee not,--To leave her helpless in the cot,And thus thy sacred charge forsakeFor the wild words a woman spake.Yea thou art all to blame herein,And very grievous is thy sin.That anger swayed thy faithless breastAnd made thee false to my behest.An arrow speeding from my bowHas laid the treacherous giant low,Who lured me eager for the chaseFar from my hermit dwelling-place.The string with easy hand I drew,The arrow as in pastime flew,   The wounded quarry bled.The borrowed form was cast away,Before mine eye a giant lay   With bright gold braceleted.My arrow smote him in the chest:The giant by the pain distressed   Raised his loud voice on high.Far rang the mournful sound: mine own,It seemed, were accent, voice, and tone,They made thee leave my spouse alone   And to my rescue fly,'

Next: Canto LXI.: Ráma's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXI.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.
As Ráma sought his leafy cot
Through his left eye keen throbbings shot,His wonted strength his frame forsook,And all his body reeled aud shook.Still on those dreadful signs he thought,Sad omens with disaster fraught,And from his troubled heart he cried,'O, may no ill my spouse betide!'He hastened to his dwelling-place,Then sinking neath his misery's weight,He looked and found it desolate.Tossing his mighty arms on highHe sought her with an eager cry.From spot to spot he wildly ranEach corner of his home to scan.He looked, but Sítá was not there;His cot was disolate and bare,Like streamlet in the winter frost,The glory of her lilies lost.With leafy tears the sad trees weptAs a wild wind their branches swept.Mourned bird aud deer, and every flowerDrooped fainting round the lonely bower.The silvan deities had fled

The spot where all the light was dead,
Where hermit coats of skin displayed,And piles of sacred grass were laid.He saw, and maddened by his painCried in lament again, again:'Where is she, dead or torn away.Lost, or some hungry giant's prey?Or did my darling chance to roveFor fruit and blossoms though the grove?Or has she sought the pool or rill,Her pitcher from the wave to fill?'His eager eyes on fire with painHe roamed about with maddened brain.Each grove and glade he searched with care,He sought, but found no Sítá there.He wildly rushed from hill to hill;From tree to tree, from rill to rill.As bitter woe his bosom rentStill Ráma roamed with fond lament:'O sweet Kadamba say has sheWho loved thy bloom been seen by thee?If thou have seen her face most fair,Say, gentle tree, I pray thee, where.O Bel tree with thy golden fruitRound as her breast, no more be mute.Where is my radiant darling, gayIn silk that mocks thy glossy spray?O Arjun, say, where is she nowWho loved to touch thy scented bough?

Do not thy graceful friend forget,
But tell me, is she living yet?Speak, Basil, thou must surely know,For like her limbs thy branches show,--Most lovely in thy fair arrayOf twining plant and tender spray.Sweet Tila, fairest of the trees,Melodious with the hum of bees,Where is my darling Sita, tell,--The dame who loved thy flowers so well?Aœoka, act thy gentle part,--Named Heartsease, 
1 give me what thou art,
To these sad eyes my darling showAnd free me from this load of woe.O Palm, in rich ripe fruitage dressedRound as the beauties of her breast,
p. 301
If thou have heart to know and feel,My peerless consort's fate reveal.Hast thou, Rose-apple, chanced to viewMy darling bright with golden hue?If thou have seen her quickly speak,Where is the dame I wildly seek?O glorious Cassia, thou art gayWith all thy loveliest bloom to-day,Where is my dear who loved to holdIn her full lap thy flowery gold?'

To many a tree and plant beside,
To Jasmin, Mango, Sál, he cried.'Say, hast thou seen, O gentle deer,The fawn-eyed Sítá wandering here?It may be that my love has strayedTo sport with fawns beneath the shade,If thou, great elephant, have seenMy darling of the lovely mien,Whose rounded limbs are soft and fineAs is that lissome trunk of thine,O noblest of wild creatures, showWhere is the dame thou needs must know.O tiger, hast thou chanced to seeMy darling? very fair is she.Cast all thy fear away, declare,Where is my moon-faced darling, where?There, darling of the lotus eye,I see thee, and 'tis vain to fly.Wilt thou not speak, dear love? I seeThy form half hidden by the tree.Stay if thou love me, Sítá, stayIn pity cease thy heartless play,Why mock me now? thy gentle breastWas never prone to cruel jest.'Tis vain behind yon bush to steal:Thy shimmering silks thy path reveal.Fly not, mine eyes pursue thy way;For pity's sake, dear Sítá, stay.Ah me, ah me, my words are vain;

My gentle love is lost or slain.
How could her tender bosom spurnHer husband on his home-return?Ah no, my love is surely dead,Fierce giants on her flesh have fed,Rending the soft limbs of their preyWhen I her lord was far away.That moon-bright face, that polished brow,Red lips, bright teeth--what are they now?Alas, my darling's shapely neckShe loved with chains of gold to deck.--That neck that mocked the sandal scent,The ruthless fiends have grasped and rentAlas, 'twas vain those arms to raiseSoft as the young tree's tender spraysAh, dainty meal for giants' lipsWere arms and quivering finger tips.Ah, she who counted many a friendWas left for fiends to seize and rend,Was left by me without defenceFrom ravening giants' violence.O Lakshman of the arm of might,
Say, is my darling love in sight;
O dearest Sítá. where art thou?Where is my darling consort now?'   Thus as he cried in wild lamentFrom grove to grove the mourner went.Here for a moment sank to rest.

Then started up and onward pressed.
Thus roaming on like one distraughtStill for his vanished love he sought.He searched in wood and hill and glade,By rock and brook and wild cascade.Through groves with restless step he spedAnd left no spot unvisited.Through lawns and woods of vast extentStill searching for his love he went   With eager steps and fast.For many a weary hour he toiled,Still in his fond endeavour foiled,   Yet hoping to the last.
Footnotes
300:1 As'oka is compounded of a not and s'oka grief.
Next: Canto LXII.: Ráma's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXII.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.
When all the toil and search was vain
He sought, his leafy home again.'Twas empty still: all scattered layThe seats of grass in disarray.He raised his shapelv arms on highAnd spoke aloud with bitter cry:'Where is the Maíthil dame?' he said,'O, whither has my darling fled?Who can have borne away my dame,Or feasted on her tender frame?If, Sítá hidden by some tree,Thou joyest still to mock at me,Cease, cease thy cruel sport, and takeCompassion, or my heart will break.Bethink thee, love, the gentle fawnsWith whom thou playest on the lawns,Impatient for thy coming waitWith streaming eyes disconsolate.Reft of my love. I needs must goHence to the shades weighed down by woe.The king our sire will see me there,And cry, 'O perjured Ráma, where.Where is thy faith, that thou canst speedFrom exile ere the time decreed?

   Ah Sítá, whither hast thou fled
And left me here disquieted,A hapless mourner, reft of hone.Too feeble with my woe to cope?E'en thus indignant Glory fliesThe wretch who stains his soul with lies.If thou, my love, art lost to view,I in my woe must perish too.'   Thus Rama by big grief distraughtWept for the wife he vainly sought.And Lakshman whose fraternal breastLonged for his weal, the chief addressed
p. 302
Whose soul gave way beneath the painWhen all his eager search was vain.Like some great elephant who standsSinking upon the treacherous sands:'Not yet, O wisest chief, despair;Renew thy toil with utmost care.This noble hill where trees are greenHas many a cave and dark ravine.The Maithil lady day by dayDelighted in the woods to stray.Deep in the grove she wanders still.Or walks by blossom-covered rill,Or fish-loved river stealing throughTall clusters of the dark bamboo.

Or else the dame with arch design
To prove thy mood, O Prince, and mine,Far in some sheltering thicket liesTo frighten ere she meet our eyes.Then come, renew thy labour, traceThe lady to her lurking-place,And search the wood from side to aideTo know where Sitá loves to bide.Collect thy thoughts, O royal chief,Nor yield to unavailing grief.'   Thus Lakshman, by attention stirred,To fresh attempts his brother spurred,And Ráma, as he ceased, beganWith Lakshman's aid each spot to scan.In eager search their way they tookThrough wood, o'er hill, by pool and brook,They roamed each mount, nor spared to seekOn ridge and crag and towering peak.They sought the dame in every spot;But all in vain; they found her not.Above, below, on every sideThey ranged the hill, and Ráma cried,'O Lakshman, O my brother stillNo trace of Sítá on'the hill!'Then Lakshman as he roamed the woodBeside his glorious brother stood,And while fierce grief his bosom burnedThis answer to the chief retained:'Thou, Ráma, after toil and pain

Wilt meet the Maithil dame again,
As Vishnu, Buli's might subdued,His empire of the earth renewed.' 
1
   Then Ráma cried in mournful tone,His spirit by his woe o'erthrown;'The wood is searched from side to side,No distant spot remains untried,No lilied pool, no streamlet whereThe lotus buds are fresh and fair.Our eyes have searched the hill with allHis caves and every waterfall,--But ah, not yet I find my wife,More precious than the breath of life.'   As thus he mourned his vanished dameA mighty trembling seized his frame,
And by o'erpowering grief assailed,
His troubled senses reeled and failed.Too great to bear his misery grew,And many a long hot sigh he drew,Then as he wept and sobbed and sighed,"O Sita, O my love!' he cried.Then Lakshman, joining palm to palm,Tried every art his woe to calm.But Ráma in his anguish heardOr heeded not one soothing word.Still for his spouse he mourned, and shrillRang out his lamentation still,

Footnotes
302:1 See Book I. Canto XXXI.
Next: Canto LXIII.: Ráma's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIII.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.
Thus for his wife in vain he sought:
Then, his sad soul with pain distraught,The hero of the lotus eyesFilled all the air with frantic cries.O'erpowered by love's strong influence, heHis absent wife still seemed to see,And thus with accents weak and faintRenewed with tears his wild complaint:'Thou,fairer than their bloom, my spouse,Art hidden by As'oka boughs.Those blooms have power to banish care,But now they drive me to despair.Thine arms are like the plantain's stem:Why let the plantain cover them?Thou art not hidden, love; thy feetbetray thee in thy dark retreat.Thou runnest in thy girlish sportTo flowery trees, thy dear resort.But cease, O cease, my love, I pray,To vex me with thy cruel play.Such mockery in a holy spotWhere hermits dwell beseems thee not.Ah, now I see thy fickle mindTo scornful mood too much inclined,

Come, large-eyed beauty. I implore;
Lone is the cot so dear before.   No, she is slain by giants; theyHave stolen or devoured their prey,Or surely at my mournful cryMy darling to her lord would fly.O Lakshman, see those troops of deer:In each sad eye there gleams a tear.Those looks of woe too clearly sayMy consort is the giants' prey.O noblest, fairest of the fair,Where art thou. best of women, where?This day will dark Kaikeyí findFresh triumph for her evil mind,When I, who with my Sítá cameReturn alone, without my dame.But ne'er can I return to seeThose chambers where my queen should beAnd hear the scornful people speak
p. 303
Of Ráma as a coward weak.For mine will be the coward's shameWho let the foeman steal his dame.How can I seek my home, or brookUpon Videha's king to look?How listen, when he bids me tell,My wanderings o'er, that all is well?

He, when I meet his eager view,
Will mark that Sítá comes not too,And when he hears the mournful taleHis wildered sense will reel and fail.'O Das'aratha.' will he cry,'Blest in thy mansion in the sky!'Ne'er to that town my steps shall bend,That town which Bharat's arms defend,For e'en the blessed homes aboveWould seem a waste without my love.Leave me, my brother, here, I pray;To fair Ayodhyá bend thy way.Without my love I cannot bearTo live one hour in blank despair.Round Bharat's neck thy fond arms twine,And greet him with these words of mine:'Dear brother, still the power retain,And o'er the land as monarch reign.'With salutation next inclineBefore thy mother, his, and mine.Still, brother, to my words attend,And with all care each dame befriend.To my dear mother's ear relateMy mournful tale and Sítá's fate.'   Thus Ráma gave his sorrow vent,And from a heart which anguish rent,Mourned for his wife in loud lament,-   Her of the glorious hair,From Lakshman's cheek the colour fled,

And o'er his heart came sudden dread,
Sick, faint, and sore disquieted   By woe too great to bear.
Next: Canto LXIV.: Rama's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIV.: RAMA'S LAMENT.
Reft of his love, the royal chief,
Weighed down beneath his whelming grief,Desponding made his brother shareHis grievous burden of despair.Over his sinking bosom rolledThe flood of sorrow uncontrolled.   And as he wept and sighed,In mournful accents faint and slowWith words congenial to his woe,   To Lakshman thus he cried:'Brother, I ween, beneath the sun,Of all mankind there lives not oneSo full of sin, whose hand has done   Such cursed deeds as mine.For my sad heart with misery bleeds,As, guerdon of those evil deeds,
Still greater woe to woe succeeds
   In never-ending line.A life of sin I freely chose,And from my past transgression flowsA ceaseless flood of bitter woes   My folly to repay.The fruit of sin has ripened fast.

Through many a sorrow have I passed,
And now the crowning grief at last   Falls on my head to-day.From all my faithful friends I fled,My sire is numbered with the dead,My royal rank is forfeited,   My mother far away.These woes on which I sadly thinkFill, till it raves above the brink,The stream of grief in which I sink,--   The flood which naught can stay.Ne'er, brother, ne'er have I complained;Though long by toil and trouble pained,Without a murmur I sustained   The woes of woodland life.But fiercer than the flames that riseWhen crackling wood the food supplies,--Flashing a glow through evening skies,--   This sorrow for my wife.Some cruel fiend has seized the preyAnd torn my trembling love away,While, as he bore her through the skies,She shrieked aloud with frantic cries,It tones of fear which, wild and shrill,Retained their native sweetness still.Ah me, that breast so soft and sweet,For sandal's precious perfume meet,Now all detained with dust and gore,Shall meet my fond caress no more.

That face, whose lips with tones so clear
Made pleasant music, sweet to hear,--With soft locks plaited o'er the brow,--Some giant's hand is on it now.It smiles not, us the dear light failsWhen Ráhu's jaw the moon assails.Ah, my true love! that shapely neckShe loved with fairest chains to deck,The cruel demons rend, and drainThe lifeblood from each mangled vein.Ah, when the savage monsters cameAnd dragged away the helpless dame,'The lady of the long soft eyeCalled like a lamb with piteous cry.Beneath this rock, O Lakshman, see,My peerless consort sat with me,And gently talked to thee the while,Her sweet lips opening with a smile.Here is that fairest stream which sheLoved ever, bright Godávarí.Ne'er can the dame have passed this way:So far alone she would not stray,Nor has my darling, lotus-eyed,Sought lilies by the river's side,For without me she ne'er would go
p. 304
To streamlets where the wild flowers grow,

Tell me not, brother, she has strayed
To the dark forest's distant shadeWhere blooming boughs are gay and sweet,And bright birds love the cool retreat.Alone my love would never dare,--My timid love,--to wander there.   O Lord of Day whose eye sees allWe act and plan, on thee I call:For naught is hidden from thy sight,--Great witness thou of wrong and right.Where is she, lost or torn away?Dispel my torturing doubt and say.And O thou Wind who blowest free,The worlds have naught concealed from thee.List to my prayer, reveal one traceOf her, the glory of her race.Say, is she stolen hence, or dead,Or do her feet the forest tread?'   Thus with disordered senses, faintWith woe he poured his sad complaint,And then, a better way to teach,Wise Lakshman spoke in seemly speech:'Up, brother dear, thy grief subdue,With heart and soul thy search renew.When woes oppress and dangers threatBrave effort ne'er was fruitless yet.'He spoke, but Ráma gave no heedTo valiant Lakshman's prudent rede.With double force the flood of pain

Rushed o'er his yielding soul again.
Next: Canto LXV.: Rama's Wrath.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXV.: RAMA'S WRATH.
With piteous voice, by woe subdued,
Thus Raghu's son his speech renewed:'Thy steps, my brother, quickly turnTo bright Godávarí and learnIf Sítá to the stream have hiedTo cull the lilies on its side.'   Obedient to the words he said,His brother to the river sped.The shelving banks he searched in vain,And then to Ráma turned again.   'I searched, but found her not,' he cried;'I called aloud, but none replied.Where can the Maithil lady stray,Whose sight would chase our cares away?I know not where, her steps untraced,Roams Sítá of the dainty waist.'   When Ráma heard the words he spokeAgain he sank beneath the stroke,And wiih a bosom anguish-fraughtHimself the lovely river sought.There standing on the shelving side,'O Sítá, where art thou?' he cried.
No spirit voice an answer gave,

No murmur from the trembling wave
Of sweet Godávarí declaredThe outrage which the fiend had dared'O speak!' the pitying spirits cried,But yet the stream their prayer denied,Nor dared she, coldly mute, relateTo the sad chief his darling's fateOf Rávan's awful form she thought,And the dire deed his arm had wrought,And still withheld by fear dismayed,The tale for which the mourner prayed.When hope was none, his heart to cheer,That the bright stream his cry would hearWhile sorrow for his darling toreHis longing soul he spake once more:'Though I have sought with tears and sighsGodárvarí no word replies,O say, what answer can I frameTo Janak father of my dame?Or how before her mother standLeading no Sítá by the hand?Where is my loyal love who wentForth with her lord to banishment?Her faith to me she nobly heldThough from my realm and home expelled,--A hermit, nursed on woodland fare,--She followed still and soothed my care.Of all my friends am I bereft,Nor is my faithful consort left.

How slowly will the long nights creep
While comfortless I wake and weep!O, if my wife may yet be found,With humble love I'll wander roundThis Janasthán, Pras'ravan's hill,Mandákini's delightful rill.See how the deer with gentle eyesLook on my face and sympathize.I mark their soft expression: eachWould soothe me, if it could, with speech.'   A while the anxious throng he eyed.And 'Where is Sítá, where?' he cried.Thus while hot tears his utterance brokeThe mourning son of Raghu spoke.The deer in pity for his woesObeyed the summons and arose.Upon his right thy stood, and raisedTheir sad eyes up to heaven and gazedEach to that quarter bent her lookWhich Rávan with his captive took.Then Raghu's son again they viewed,And toward that point their way pursued.Then Lakshman watched their looks intentAs moaning on their way they went,And marked each sign which struck his senseWith mute expressive influence,Then as again his sorrow wokeThus to his brother chief he spoke:'Those deer thy eager question heard

p. 305
And rose at once by pity stirred:
See, in thy search their aid they lend,See, to the south their looks they bend.Arise, dear brother, let us goThe way their eager glances show,If haply sign or trace descriedOur footsteps in the search may guide.'   The son of Raghu gave assent,And quickly to the south they went;With eager eyes the earth he scanned,And Lakshman followed close at hand.An each to other spake his thought,And round with anxious glances sought,Scattered before them in the way,Blooms of a fallen garland lay.When Ráma saw that flowery rainHe spoke once more with bitterest pain:'O Lakshman every flower that liesHere on the ground I recognize.I culled them in the grove, and thereMy darling twined them in her hair.The sun, the earth, the genial breezeHave spared these flowers my soul to please.'   Then to that woody hill he prayed,Whence flashed afar each wild cascade:'O best of mountains, hast thou seenA dome of perfect form and mien

In some sweet spot with trees o'ergrown,-
My darling whom I left alone?'Then as a lion threats a deerHe thundered with a voice of fear:'Reveal her, mountain, to my viewWith golden limbs and golden hue.Where is my darling Sítá? speakBefore I rend thee peak from peak.'   The mountain seemed her track to show,But told not all he sought to know.Then Das'aratha's son renewedHis summons as the mount he viewed:'Soon as my flaming arrows fly,Consumed to ashes shall thou lieWithout a herb or bud or tree,And birds no more shall dwell in thee.And if this stream my prayer deny,My wrath this day her flood shall dry,Because she lends no aid to traceMy darling of the lotus face.'   Thus Ráma spake as though his ireWould scorch them with his glance of fire;Then searching farther on the groundThe footprint of a fiend he found,And small light traces here and there,Where Sítá in her great despair,Shrieking for Ráma's help, had fledBefore the giant's mighty tread.His careful eye each trace surveyed

Which Sítá and the fiend had made,--
The quivers and the broken bowAnd ruined chariot of the foe,--And told, distraught by fear and grief,His tidings to his brother chief:   'O Lakshman, here,' he cried 'beholdMy Sítá's earrings dropped with gold.Here lie her garlands torn and rent,Here lies each glittering ornament.O look, the ground on every sideWith blood-like drops of gold is dyed.The fiends who wear each strange disguiseHave seized, I ween, the helpless prize.My lady, by their hands o'erpowered,Is slaughtered, mangled, and devoured.Methinks two fearful giants cameAnd waged fierce battle for the dame.Whose, Lakshman, was this mighty bowWith pearls and gems in glittering rowCast to the ground the fragments lie,And still their glory charms the eye.A bow so mighty sure was plannedFor heavenly God or giant's hand.Whose was this coat of golden mailWhich, though its lustre now is pale,Shone like the sun of morning, brightWith studs of glittering lazulite?Whose, Lakshman, was this bloom-wreathed shadeWith all its hundred ribs displayed?

This screen, most meet for royal brow,
With broken staff lies useless now.And these tall asses, goblin-faced,With plates of golden harness graced,Whose hideous forms are stained with goreWho is the lord whose yoke they bore?Whose was this pierced and broken carThat shoots a flame-like blaze afar?Whose these spent shafts at random spread,Each fearful with its iron head,--With golden mountings fair to see,Long as a chariot's axle-tree?These quivers see, which, rent in twain,Their sheaves of arrows still contain.Whose was this driver? Dead and cold,His hands the whip and reins still hold.See, Lakshman, here the foot I traceOf man, nay, one of giant race.The hatred that I nursed of oldGrows mightier now a hundred foldAgainst these giants, fierce of heart,Who change their forms by magic art.Slain, eaten by the giant press,Or stolen is the votaress,Nor could her virtue bring defenceTo Sítá seized and hurried hence.O, if my love be slain or lostAll hope of bliss for me is crossed.The power of all the worlds were vain

To bring one joy to soothe my pain.
The spirits with their blinded eyesWould look in wonder, and despiseThe Lord who made the worlds, the greatCreator when compassionate.And so, I ween, the Immortals turnCold eyes upon me now, and spurn
p. 306
The weakling prompt at pity's call,Devoted to the good of all.But from this day behold me changed,From every gentle grace estranged.Now be it mine all life to slay,And sweep these cursed fiends away.As the great sun leaps up the sky,And the cold moonbeams fade and die,So vengeance rises in my breast.One passion conquering all the rest.Gandharvas in their radiant place,The Yakshas, and the giant race,Kinnars and men shall look in vainFor joy they ne'er shall see again.The anguish of my great despair,O Lakshman, fills the heaven and air;And I in wrath all life will slayWithin the triple world to-day.Unless the Gods in heaven who dwell

Restore my Sítá safe and well,
I armed with all the fires of Fate.The triple world will devastate.The troubled stars from heaven shall fall,The moon be wrapped in gloomy pall,The fire be quenched, the wind be stilled,The radiant sun grow dark and chilled;Crushed every mountain's towering pride,And every lake and river dried,Dead every creeper, plant, and tree,And lost for aye the mighty sea.Thou shalt the word this day beholdIn wild disorder uncontrolled,With dying life which naught defendsFrom the fierce storm my bowstring sends.My shafts this day, for Sítá's sake,The life of every fiend shall take.The Gods this day shall see the forceThat wings my arrows on their course,And mark how far that course is held,By my unsparing wrath impelled.No God, not one of Daitya strain,Goblin or Rákshas shall remain.My wrath shall end the worlds, and allDemons and Gods therewith shall fall.Each world which Gods, the Dánav race,And giants make their dwelling place,Shall fall beneath my arrows sentIn fury when my bow is bent.

The arrows loosened from my string
Confusion on the worlds shall bring.For she is lost or breathes no more,Nor will the Gods my love restore.Hence all on earth with life and breathThis day I dedicate to death.All, till my darling they reveal,The fury of my shafts shall feel.'  Thus as he spake by rage impelled,Red grew his eyes, his fierce lips swelled.His bark coat round his form he drewAnd coiled his hermit braids anew.Like Rudra when he yearned to slayThe demon Tripur  
1 in the fray.
So looked the hero brave and wise,The fury flashing from his eyes.Then Ráma, conqueror of the foe,From Lakshman's hand received his bow,Strained the great string, and laid thereonA deadly dart that flashed and shone,And spake these words as fierce in ireAs He who ends the worlds with fire:   'As age and time and death and fateAll life with checkless power await,So Lakshman in my wrath to-dayMy vengeful might shall brook no stay,Unless this day I see my dameIn whose sweet form is naught to blame,--Yea, as before, my love behold

Fair with bright teeth and perfect mould,
This world shall feel a deadly blowDestroyed with ruthless overthrow,And serpent lords and Gods of air,Gandharvas, men, the doom shall share.'
Next: Canto LXVI.: Lakshman's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVI.: LAKSHMAN'S SPEECH.
He stood incensed with eyes of flame,
Still mourning for his ravished dame,Determined, like the fire of Fate,To leave the wide world desolate.His ready bow the hero eyed,And as again, again he sighed,The triple world would fain consumeLike Hara  
2 in the day of doom.
Then Lakshman moved with sorrow viewedHis brother in unwonted mood,And reverent palm to palm applied,Thus spoke with lips which terror dried'Thy heart was ever soft and kind,To every creature's good inclined.Cast not thy tender mood away,Nor yield to anger's mastering sway.The moon for gentle grace is known,The sun has splendour all his own,The restless wind is free and fast,And earth in patience unsurpassed.So glory with her noble fruitIs thine eternal attribute.O, let not, for the sin of one,The triple world be all undone.

I know not whose this car that lies
In fragments here before our eyes,Nor who the chiefs who met and fought,Nor what the prize the foemen sought;Who marked the ground with hoof and wheel,
p. 307
Or whose the hand that plied the steelWhich left this spot, the battle o'er,Thus sadly dyed with drops of gore.Searching with utmost care I viewThe signs of one and not of two.Where'er I turn mine eyes I traceNo mighty host about the place.Then mete not out for one offenceThis all-involving recompense,For kings should use the sword they bear,Put mild in time should learn to spare,Thou, ever moved by misery's call,Waft the great hope and stay of allThroughout the world who would not blameThis outrage on thy ravished dame?Gandharvas, Dánavs, Gods, the trees,The rocks, the rivers, and the seas,Can ne'er in aught thy soul offend,As one whom holiest rites befriend.But him who dared to steal the damePursue, O King, with ceaseless aim,

With me, the hermits' holy band,
And thy great bow to arm thy handBy every mighty flood we'll seeks,Each wood, each hill from base to peak.To the fair homes of Gods we'll fly,And bright Gandharvas in the sky,Until we reach, where'er he be,The wretch who stole thy spouse from thee,Then if the Gods will not restoreThy Sítá when the search is o'er,Then, royal lord of Kos'al's land,No longer hold thy vengeful hand.If meekness, prayer, and right be weakTo bring thee back the dame we seek,Up, brother, with a deadly showerOf gold-bright shafts thy foes o'erpower,Fierce as the flashing levin sentFrom King Mahendra's firmament.
Footnotes
306:1 An Asur or demon, king of Tripura, the modern 
Tipperah.
306:2 S'iva.

Next: Canto LXVII.: Ráma Appeased.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVII.: RÁMA APPEASED.
As Ráma, pierced by sorrow's sting,
Lamented like a helpless thing,And by his mighty woe distraughtWas last in maze of troubled thought,Sumitrá's son with loving careConsoled him in his wild despair,And while his feet he gently pressedWith words like these the chief addressed;'For sternest vow and noblest deedWas Das'aratha blessed with seed.Thee for his son the king obtained,Like Amrit by the Gods regained.Thy gentle graces won his heart,And all too weak to live apartThe monarch died, as Bharat told,And lives on high mid Gods enrolled.
If thou, O Ráma, wilt not bear
This grief which fills thee with despair,How shall a weaker man e'er hope,Infirm and mean, with woe to cope?Take heart, I pray thee, noblest chief:What man who breathes is free from grief?Misfortunes come and burn like flame,

Then fly as quickly as they came.
Yayáti son of Nahush reignedWith Indra on the throne he gained.But falling for a light offenceHe mourned a while the consequence.Vasishtha, reverend saint and sage,Priest of our sire from youth to age,Begot a hundred sons, but theyWere smitten in a single day.  
1
And she, the queen whom all revere,The mother whom we hold so dear,The earth herself not seldom feelsFierce fever when she shakes and reels.And those twin lights,the world's great eyes,On which the universe relies,--Does not eclipse at times assailTheir brilliance till their fires grow pale?The mighty Powers, the Immortal BlestBend to a law which none contest.No God, no bodied life is freeFrom conquering Fate's supreme decree,E'en S'akra's self must reap the meedOf virtue and of sinful deed.And O great lord of men, wilt thouHelpless beneath thy misery bow?No, if thy dame be lost or dead,O hero, still be comforted,Nor yield for ever to thy woeO'ermastered like the mean and low.

Thy peers, with keen far-reaching eyes,
Spend not their hours in ceaseless sighs;In dire distress, in whelming illTheir manly looks are hopeful still.To this, great chief, thy reason bend,And earnestly the truth perpend.By reason's aid the wisest learnThe good and evil to discern.With sin and goodness scarcely knownFaint light by chequered lives is shown;Without some clear undoubted deedWe mark not how the fruits succeed.In time of old, O thou most brave,To me thy lips such counsel gave.Vrihaspati  
2 can scarcely find
New wisdom to instruct thy mind.For thine is wit and genious highMeet for the children of the sky.I rouse that heart benumbed by painAnd call to vigorous life again.Be manly godlike vigour shown;Put forth that noblest strength, thine own.
p. 308
Strive, best of old Ikshváku's strain,Strive till the conquered foe be slain.Where is the profit or the joyIf thy fierce rage the worlds destroy?

Search till thou find the guilty foe,
Then let thy hand no mercy show.'
Footnotes
307:1 See Book I, Canto LIX.
307:2 The Preceptor of the Gods
Next: Canto LXVIII.: Jatáyus.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVIII.: JATÁYUS.
Thus faithful Lakshman strove to cheer
The prince with counsel wise and clear.Who, prompt to seize the pith of all,Let not that wisdom idly fall.With vigorous effort he restrainedThe passion in his breast that reigned,And leaning on his bow for restHis brother Lakshman thus addressed:'How shall we labour now, reflect;Whither again our search direct?Brother, what plan canst thou deviseTo bring her to these longing eyes?'   To him by toil and sorrow triedThe prudent Lakshman thus replied:'Come, though our labour yet be vain,And search through Janasthán again,-A realm where giant foes abound.And trees and creepers hide the ground.For there are caverns deep and dread,By deer and wild birds tenanted,And hills with many a dark abyss,Grotto and rock and precipice.There bright Gandharvas love to dwell,And Kinnars in each bosky dell.

With me thy eager search to aid
Be every hill and cave surveyed.Great chiefs like thee, the best of men,Endowed with sense and piercing ken,Though tried by trouble never fail.Like rooted hills that mock the gale,'   Then Ráma, pierced by anger's sting,Laid a keen arrow on his string,And by the faithful Lakshman's sideRoamed through the forest far and wide.Jatáyus there with blood-drops dyed,Lying upon the ground he spied,Huge as a mountain's shattered crest,Mid all the birds of air the best.In wrath the mighty bird he eyed,And thus the chief to Lakshman cried:   'Ah me, these signs the truth betray;My darling was the vulture's prey.Some demon in the bird's disguiseRoams through the wood that round us lies,On large eyed Sítá he has fed.And rest him now with wings outspreadBut my keen * whose flight is true,Shall *
An arrow on the string he laid,
And rushing near the bird surveyed,While earth to ocean's distant sideTrembled beneath his furious stride.

With blood and froth on neck and beak
The dying bird essayed to speak,And with a piteous voice, distressed,Thus Das'aratha's son addressed:   'She whom like some sweet herb of graceThou seekest in this lonely place,Fair lady, is fierce Rávan's prey,Who took, beside, my life away.Lakshman and thou had parted henceAnd left the dame without defence,I saw her swiftly borne awayBy Rávan's might which none could stay.I hurried to the lady's aid,I crushed his car and royal shade,And putting forth my warlike mightHurled Rávan to the earth in fight.Here, Ráma, lies his broken bow,Here lie the arrows of the foe.There on the ground before thee areThe fragments of his battle car.There bleeds the driver whom my wingsBeat down with ceaseless buffetingsWhen toil my aged strength subdued,His sword my weary pinions hewed.Then lifting up the dame he bareHis captive through the fields of air.Thy vengeful blows from me restrain,Already by the giant slain.'   When Ráma heard the vulture tell

The tale that proved his love so well,
His bow upon the ground he placed,And tenderly the bird embraced:Then to the earth he fell o'erpowered,And burning tears both brothers showered,For double pain and anguish pressedUpon the patient hero's breast.The solitary bird be eyedWho in the lone wood gasped and sighed,And as again his anguish wokeThus Ráma to his brother spoke:   'Expelled from power the woods I tread,My spouse is lost, the bird is dead.A fate so sad. I ween, would tameThe vigour of the glorious flame.If I to cool my fever triedTo cross the deep from side to side.The sea,--so hard my fate,--would dryHis waters as my feet came nigh.In all this world there lives not oneSo cursed as I beneath the sun;So strong a net of misery castAround me holds the captive fast,Best of all birds that play the wing,Loved, honoured by our sire the king,The vulture, in my fate enwound,Lies bleeding, dying on the ground.'   Then Ráma and his brother stirred

p. 309
By pity mourned the royal bird,
And, as their hands his limbs caressed,Affection for a sire expressed.And Ráma to his bosom strainedThe bird with mangled wings distained,   With crimson blood-drops dyed.He fell, and shedding many a tear,   'Where is my spouse than life more dear?     Where is my love?' he cried.
Next: Canto LXIX.: The Death of Jatáyus.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIX.: THE DEATH OF JATÁYUS.
As Ráma viewed with heart-felt yain
The vulture whom the fiend had slain,In words with tender love impressedHis brother chief he thus addressed:   'This royal bird with faithful thoughtFor my advantage strove and fought.Slain by the fiend in mortal strifeFor me he yields his noble life.See, Lakshman, how his wounds have bled;His struggling breath will soon have fled.Faint is his voice, and near to die,He scarce can lift his trembling eye.Jatáyus, if thou still can speak,Give, give the answer that I seek.The fate of ravished Sítá tell,And how thy mournful chance befell.Say why the giant stole my dame:What have I done that he could blame?What fault in me has Rávan seenThat he should rob me of my queen?How looked the lady's moon-bright cheek?What were the words she found to speak?His strength, his might, his deeds declare:And tell the form he loves to wear.

To all my questions make reply:
Where does the giant's dwelling lie?'   The noble bird his glances bentOn Ráma as he made lament,And in low accents faint and weakWith anguish thus began to speak.'Fierce Rávan, king of giant race,Stole Sítá from thy dwelling-place.He calls his magic art to aidWith wind and cloud and gloomy shade.When in the fight my power was spentMy wearied wings he cleft and rent.Then round the dame his arms he threw,And to the southern region flew.O Raghu's son. I gasp for breath,My swimming sight is dim in death.Even now before my vision passBright trees of * with hair of grass,*Brings on the thief a flood of woeThe giant in his haste *
'Twas Vinda's hour,  
1 or heeded not.
Those robbed at such a time obtain
Their plundered store and wealth again.He, like a fish that takes the bait,In briefest time shall meet his fate.Now be thy troubled heart controlledAnd for thy lady's loss consoled.

For thou wilt slay the fiend in fight
And with thy dame have new delight.'   With senses clear, though sorely tried,The royal vulture thus replied,While as he sank beneath his painForth rushed the tide of blood again.'Him,  
2 brother of the Lord of Gold,
Vis'ravas' self begot of old.'Thus spoke the bird, and stained with goreResigned the breath that came no more.   'Speak, speak again!' thus Ráma cried,With reverent palm to palm applied,But from the frame the spirit fledAnd to the skiey regions sped.The breath of life had passed away.Stretched on the ground the body lay.   When Rama saw the vulture lie,Hupe as a hill, with darksome eye,With many a poignant woe distressedHis brother chief he thus addressed:'Amid these haunted shades contentFull many a year this bird has spent.His life in home of giants passed,In Dandak wood he dies at last.The years in lengthened course have fledUntroubled o'er the vulture's head,And now he lies in death, for noneThe stern decrees of Fate may shun.See, Lakshman, how the vulture fell

While for my sake he battled well.
And strove to free with onset boldMy Sítá from the giant's hold.Supreme amid the vulture kindHis ancient rule the bird resigned.And conquered in tho fruitless strifeGave for my sake his noble life.O Lakshman, many a time we seeGreat souls who keep the law's decree,With whom the weak sure refuge find,In creatures of inferior kind.The kiss of her, my darling queen,Strikes with a pang less fiercely keenThan now this slaughtered bird to seeWho nobly fought and died for me.As Das'aratha, good and great,Was glorious in his high estate,Honoured by all to all endeared,So was this royal bird revered.Bring fuel for the funeral site:These hands the solemn fire shall light
p. 310
And on the burning pyre shall layThe bird who died for me to-day.Now on the gathered wood shall lieThe lord of all the birds that fly,And I will burn with honours due

My champion whom the giant slew.
O royal bird of noblest heart,Graced with all funeral rites departTo bright celestial seats above,Rewarded for thy faithful love.Dwell in thy happy home with thoseWhose constant fires of worship rose.Live blest amid the unyielding brave,And those who land in largess gave.   Sore grief upon his bosom weighedAs on the pyre the bird he laid,And bade the kindled flame ascendTo burn the body of his friend.Then with his brother by his sideThe hero to the forest hied.There many a stately deer he slew.The flesh around the bird to strew.The venison into balls he made.And on fair grass before him laid.Then that the parted soul might riseAnd find free passage to the skies,Each solemn word and text he saidWhich Brahmans utter o'er the dead.Then hastening went the princely pairTo bright Godayaní, and thereLibations of the stream they pouredIn honour of the vulture lord,With solemn ritual to the slain,As scripture's holy texts ordain.

Thus offerings to the bird they gave
And bathed their bodies in the wave,   The vulture monarch having wrought   A hard and glorious feat,Honoured by Ráma sage in thought,   Soared to his blissful seat.The brothers, when each rite was paid   To him of birds supreme,Their hearts with new-found comfort stayed,   And turned them from the stream.Like soveriegns of celestial race   Within the wood they came,Each pondering the means to trace,   The captor of the dame.
Footnotes
309:1 From the * 
309:2 Rávan
Next: Canto LXX.: Kabandha.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXX.: KABANDHA.
When every rite was duly paid
The princely brothers onward strayed,An eager in the lady's questThey turned their footsteps to the west.Through lonely woods that round them layIkshváku's children made their way,
And armed with bow and shaft and brand
Pressed onward to the southern land.Thick trees and shrubs and creepers grewIn the wild grove they hurried through.'Twas dark and drear and hard to passFor tangled thorns and matted grass.Still onward with a southern courseThey made their way with vigorous forceAnd passing through the mazes stoodBeyond that vast and fearful wood.With toil and hardship yet unspentThree leagues from Janasthán they went,And speeding on their way at lastWithin the wood of Krauncha  
1 passed:
A fearful forest wild and blackAs some huge pile of cloudy rack,

Filled with all birds and beasts, where grew
Bright blooms of every varied hue.On Sítá bending every thoughtThrough all the mighty wood they sought,And at the lady's loss dismayedHere for a while and there they stayed.Then turning farther eastward theyPursued three leagues their weary way,Passed Krauncha's wood and reached the groveWhere elephants rejoiced to rove.The chiefs that awful wood surveyedWhere deer and wild birds filled each glade,Where scarce a step the foot could takeFor tangled shrub and tree and brake.There in a mountain's woody sideA cave the royal brothers spied,With dread abysses deep as hell,Where darkness never ceased to dwell.When, pressing on, the lords of menStood near the entrance of the den,They saw within the dark recessA huge misshapen giantess;A thing the timid heart that shookWith fearful shape and savage look.Terrific fiend, her voice was fierce,Long were her teeth to rend and pierce.The monster gorged her horrid feastOf flesh of many a savage beast,While her long locks, at random flung,

Dishevelled o'er her shoulders hung.
Their eyes the royal brothers raised,And on the fearful monster gazed.Forth from her den she came and glancedAt Lakshman as he first advanced,Her eager arms to hold him spread,And 'Come and be my love' she said,Then as she held him to her breast,The prince in words like these addressed:'Behold thy treasure fond and fair:Ayomukhi  
2 the name I bear.
p. 311
In thickets of each lofty hill,On islets of each brook and rill,With me delighted shalt thou play,And live for many a lengthened day.'   Enraged he heard the monster woo;His ready sword he swiftly drew,And the sharp steel that quelled his foesCut through her breast and ear and nose.Thus mangled by his vengeful swordIn rage and pain the demon roared,And hideous with her awful faceSped to her secret dwelling place.Soon as the fiend had fled from sight,The brothers, dauntless in their might,Beached a wild forest dark and dread

Whose tangled ways were hard to tread.
Then bravest Lakshman, virtuous youth,The friend of purity and truth,With reverent palm to palm appliedThus to his glorious brother cried:   'My arm presaging throbs amain,My troubled heart is sick with pain,And cheerless omens ill portendWhere'er my anxious eyes I bend.Dear brother, hear my words: advanceResolved and armed for every chance,For every sign I mark to-dayForetells a peril in the way.This bird of most ill-omened note,Loud streaming with discordant throat,Announces with a warning cryThat strife and victory are nigh.'   Then as the chiefs their search pursuedThroughout the dreary solitude,They heard amazed a mighty soundThat broke the very trees around.As though a furious tempest passedCrashing the wood beneath its blast.Then Ráma raised his trusty sword,And both the hidden cause explored.There stood before their wondering eyesA fiend broad-chested, huge of size.A vast misshapen trunk they sawIn height surpassing nature's law.

It stood before them dire and dread
Without a neck, without a head.Tall as some hill aloft in air,Its limbs were clothed with bristling hair,And deep below the monster's waistHis vast misshapen mouth was placed.His form was huge, his voice was loudAs some dark-tinted thunder cloud,Forth from his ample chest there cameA brilliance as of gushing flame.Beneath long lashes, dark and keenThe monster's single eye was seen.Deep in his chest, long, fiercely bright,It glittered with terrific light.He swallowed down his savage fareOf lion, bird, and slaughtered bear,Aud with huge teeth exposed to view
O'er his great lips his tongue he drew.
His arms unshapely, vast and dread,A league in length, he raised and spread.He seized with monstrous hands a herdOf deer and many a bear and bird.Among them all he picked and chose,Drew forward these, rejected those.Before the princely pair he stoodBarring their passage through the wood.A league of shade the chiefs had passedWhen on the fiend their eyes they cast.

A monstrous shape without a head
With mighty arms before him spread,They saw that hideous trunk appearThat struck the trembling eye with fear.Then, stretching to their full extentHis awful arms with fingers bent,Bound Raghu's princely sons he castEach grasping limb and held them fast.Though strong of arm and fierce in fight,Each armed with bow and sword to smite,The royal brothers, brave and bold,Were helpless in the giant's hold.Then Raghu's son, heroic still,Felt not a pang his bosom thrill;But young, with no protection near,His brother's heart was sad with fear,And thus with trembling tongue he saidTo Ráma, sore disquieted:   'Ah me, ah me, my days are told:O see me in the giant's hold.Fly, son of Raghu, swiftly flee,And thy dear self from danger free.Me to the fiend an offering give;Fly at thine ease thyself and live.Thou, great Katkutstha's son, I ween,Wilt find ere long thy Maithil queen,And when thou holdest, throned again,Thine old hereditary reign,With servants prompt to do thy will,

O think upon thy brother still.'
As thus the trembling Lakshman cried,The dauntless Ráma thus replied:'Brother, from causeless dread forbear.A chief like thee should scorn despair.'He spoke to soothe his wild alarm:Then fierce Kabandha  
1 long of arm,
Among the Dánavs  2 first and best,
The sons of Raghu thus addressed:'What men are you, whose shoulders showBroad as a bull's, with sword and bow,Who roam this dark and horrid place.Brought by your fate before my face?Declare by what occasion ledThese solitary wilds you tread,With swords and bows and shafts to pierce,
p. 312
Like bulls whose horns are strong and fierce.Why have you sought this forest landWhere wild with hunger's pangs I stand?Now as your steps my path have crossedEsteem your lives already lost?   The royal brothers heard with dreadThe words which fierce Kabandha said.And Ráma to his brother cried,Whose cheek by blanching fear was dried.   'Alas, we fall, O valiant chief,

From sorrow into direr grief,
Still mourning her I hold so dearWe see our own destruction near.Mark, brother, mark what power has timeO'er all that live, in every chimeNow, lord of men, thyself and meInvolved in fatal danger see.'Tis not, be sure, the might of FateThat crushes all with deadly weight.Ne'er can the brave and strong, who knowThe use of spear and sword and bow,The force of conquering time withstand,But fall like barriers built of sand.   Thus in calm strength which naught could shakeThe son of Das'aratha spake,   With glory yet unstainedUpon Sumitrá's son he bentHis eyes, and firm in his intent   His dauntless heart maintained.
Footnotes
310:1 Or Curlews' Wood.
310:2 Iron-faced.

311:1 Kabandha means a trunk.
311:2 A class of mythological giants. In the Epic period 
they were probably personifications of the aborigines of 
India.
Next: Canto LXXI.: Kabandha's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXI.: KABANDHA'S SPEECH.
Kabandha saw each chieftain stand
Imprisoned by his mighty hand,Which like a snare around him pressedAnd thus the royal pair addressed:'Why, warriors, are your glances bentOn me whom hungry pangs torment?Why stand with wildered senses? FateHas brought you now my maw to sate.'   When Lakshman heard, a while appalled,His ancient courage he recalled,And to his brother by his sideWith seasonable counsel cried :   'This vilest of the giant raceWill draw us to his side apace.Come, rouse thee; let the vengeful swordSmite off his arms, my honoured lord.This awful giant, vast of size,On his huge strength of arm relies,And o'er the world victorious, thusWith mighty force would slaughter us,But in cold blood to slay, O King.Discredit on the brave would bring,As when some victim in the riteShuns not the hand up raised to smite.'

   The monstrous fiend, to anger stirred,
The converse of the brothers heard.
His horrid mouth he opened wideAnd drew the princes to his side.They, skilled due time and place to noteUnsheathed their glittering sword and smote,Till fiom the giant's shoulders theyHad hewn the mighty arms away.His trenchant falchion Ráma pliedAnd smote him on the better side,While valiant Lakshman on the leftThe arm that held him prisoned cleft,Then to the earth dismembered fellThe monster with a hideous yell,And like a cloud's his deep roar wentThrough earth and air and firmament.Then as the giant's blood flowed fast,On his cleft limbs his eye he cast,And called upon the princely pairTheir names and lineage to declare.Him then the noble Lakshman, blestWith fortune's favouring marks, addressed,And told the fiend his brother's nameAnd the high blood of which he came:'Ikshváku's heir here Ráma stands,Illustrious through a hundred lands.I, younger brother of the heir,O fiend, the name of Lakshman bear.

His mother stole his realm away
And drove him forth in woods to stray.Thus through the mighty forest heRoamed with his royal wife and me.While glorious as a God he madeHis dwelling in the greenwood shade,Some giant stole away his dame,And seeking her we hither came.But tell me who thou art, and whyWith headless trunk that towered so high.With flaming face beneath thy chest,Thou liest crushed in wild unrest.'   He heard the words that Lakshman spoke,And memory in his breast awoke,Recalling Indra's words to mindHe spoke in gentle tones and kind:'O welcome best of men, are yeWhom, blest by fate, this day I see.A blessing on each trenchant bladeThat low on earth these arms has laid!Thou, lord of men, incline thine earThe story of my woe to hear,While I the rebel pride declareWhich doomed me to the form I wear.'
Next: Canto LXXII.: Kabandha's Tale.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXII.: KABANDHA'S TALE.
'Lord of the mighty arm, of yore
A shape transcending thought I wore,And through the triple world's extentMy fame for might and valour went.
p. 313
Scarce might the sun and moon on high,Scarce Sakra, with ray beauty vie.Then for a time this form I took,And the great world with trembling shookThe saints in forest shades who dweltThe terror of my presence felt.But once I stirred to furious rageGreat Sthúlas'nas, glorious sage.Culling in woods his hermit foodMy hideous shape with fear he viewed.Then forth his words of anger burstThat bade me live a thing accursed:'Thou, whose delight is others' pain,This grisly form shalt still retain.'Then when I prayed him to relentAnd fix some term of punishment,--Prayed that the curse at length might cease,

He bade me thus expect release:
'Let Ráma cleave thine arms awayAnd on the pyre thy body lay,And then shalt thou, set free from doom,Thine own fair shape once more assume.'O Lakshman, hear my words: in meThe world-illustrious Danu see.By Indra's curse, subdued in fight,I wear this form which scares the sight.By sternest penance long maintainedThe mighty Father's grace I gained.When length of days the God bestowed,With foolish pride my bosom glowed.My life, of lengthened years assured,I deemed from Sakra's might secured.Led by my senseless pride astrayI challenged Indra to the fray.A flaming bolt with many a knotWith his terrific arm he shot.And straight my head and thighs compressedWere buried in my bulky chest.Deaf to each prayer and piteous callHe sent me not to Yama's hall.'These prayers and cries,' he said 'are vain.The Father's word must true remainBut how my lengthened life be spentBy one the bolt has * and rent?How can I live' I cried, 'unfedWith shattered face and thighs and head?'

As thus I spoke his grace to crave
Arms each a league in length he gave,And opened in my chest beneathThis mouth supplied with fearful teeth.So my huge arms I used to castRound woodland creatures as they passed,And fed within the forest hereOn lion, tiger, pard,* and deer.Then Indra spake to soothe my grief:'When Rama and his brother chiefFrom thy huge bulk those arms shall cleave,Then shall the skies thy sould recieve.'Disguised in this terrific shape
I let no woodland thing escape,
And still my longing sould was pleasedWhene'er my arms a victim seized,For in these arms I fondly thoughtWould Ráma's self at last be caught.Thus hoping, toiling many a dayI yearned to cast my life away,And here, my lord, thou standest now:Blessings be thine for none but thouCould cleave my arms with trenchant stroke:True are the words the hermit spoke.Now let me, best of warriors, lendMy counsel, and thy plans befriend,And aid thee with advice in turnIf thou with fire my corse wilt burn.'

   As thus the mighty Danu prayed
With offer of his friendly aid,While Lakshman gazed with anxious eye,The virtuous Ráma made reply:'Lakshman and I through forest shadeFrom Janasthán a while had strayed.When none was near her, Rávan cameAnd bore away my glorious dame,The giant's form and size unknown,I learn as yet his name alone.Not yet the power and might we knowOr dwelling of the monstrous foe.With none our helpless feet to guideWe wander here by sorrow tried.Let pity move thee to requiteOur service in the funeral rite.Our hands shall bring the boughs that, dryWhere elephants have rent them, lie,Then dig a pit, and light the fireTo burn thee as the laws require.Do thou as meed of this declareWho stole my spouse, his dwelling where,0, if thou can. I pray thee say,And let this grace our deeds repay.'   Danu had lent attentive earThe words which Ráma spoke to hear,And thus, a speaker skilled and tried.To that great orator replied:' No heavenly lore my soul endows,

Naught know I of thy Maithil spouse.
Yet will I, when my shape I wear.Him who will tell thee all declare.Then, Ráma, will my lips discloseHis name who well that giant knowsBut, till the flames my corse devourThis hidden knowledge mocks my power.For through that curse's withering taintMy knowledge now is small and faintUnknown the giant's very nameWho bore away the Maithil dameCursed for my evil deeds I woreA shape which all the worlds abhor.Now ere with wearied steeds the sunThrough western skies his course have run,Deep in a pit my body lay
p. 314
And burn it in the wonted way.When in the grave my corse is placed,With fire and funeral honours graced,Then I, great chief, his name will tellWho knows the giant robber well.With him, who guides his life aright,In league of trusting love unite,And he, O valiant prince, will beA faithful friend and aid to thee.For, Ráma, to his searching eyes

The triple world uncovered lies.
For some dark cause of old, I ween,Through all the spheres his ways have been.'
Next: Canto LXXIII.: Kabandha's Counsel.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXIII.: KABANDHA'S COUNSEL.
The monster ceased: the princely pair
Heard great Kabandha's eager prayer.Within a mountain cave they sped,Where kindled fire with care they fed.Then Lakshman in his mighty handsBrought ample store of lighted brands,And to a pile of logs appliedThe flame that ran from side to side.The spreading glow with gentle forceConsumed Kabundha's mighty corse,Till the unresting flames had drunkThe marrow of the monstrous trunk,As balls of butter melt awayAmid the fires that o'er them play.Then from the pyre, like flame that glowsUndimmed by cloudy smoke, he rose,In garments pure of spot or speck,A heavenly wreath about his neck.Resplendent in his bright attireHe sprang exultant from the pyre.While from neck, arm, and foot was sentThe flash of gold and ornament.High on a chariot, bright of hue,Which swans of fairest pinion drew,

He filled each region of the air
With splendid glow reflected there,Then in the sky he stayed his carAnd called to Ráma from afar:'Hear, chieftain, while my lips explainThe means to win thy spouse again.Six plans, O prince, the wise pursueTo reach the aims we hold in view. 
1
When evils ripening sorely press,They load the wretch with new distress.So thou and Lakshman, tried by woe,Have felt at last a fiercer blow,And plunged in bitterest grief to-dayLament thy consort torn away.There is no course but this: attend;
Make, best of friends, that chief thy friend.
Unless his prospering help thou gainThy plans and hopes must all be vain.O Ráma, hear my words, and seek,Sugríva, for of him I speak.His brother Báli, Indra's son,Expelled him when the fight was won.With four great chieftains, faithful still,He dwells on Rishyamúka's hill.--Fair mountain, lovely with the flowOf Pampá's waves that glide below,--Lord of the Vánars  
1b just and true,
Strong, very glorious, bright to view,

Unmatched in counsel, firm and meek,
Bound by each word his lips may speak,Good, splendid, mighty, bold and brave,Wise in each plan to guide and save,His brother, fired by lust of sway,Drove forth the prince in woods to stray.In all thy search for Sítá heThy ready friend and help will be.With him to aid thee in thy questDismiss all sorrow from thy breast.Time is a mighty power, and noneHis fixed decree can change or shun.So rich reward thy toil shall bless,And naught can stay thy sure success.Speed hence, O chief, without delay,To strong Sugríva take thy way.This hour thy footsteps onward bend,And make that mighty prince thy friend.With him before the attesting flameIn solemn truth alliance frame.Nor wilt thou, if thy heart be wise,Sugríva, Vánar king, despise.Of boundless strength, all shapes he wears,He hearkens to a suppliant's prayers,And, grateful for each kindly deed,Will help and save in hour of need,And you, I ween, the power possessTo aid his hopes and give redress.He, let his cause succeed or fail,

Will help you, and you must prevail.
A banished prince, in fear and woeHe roams where Pampá's waters flow,True offspring of the Lord of LightExpelled by Báli's conquering might.Go, Raghu's son, that chieftain seekWho dwells on Rishyamúka's peak.Before the flame thy weapons castAnd bind the bonds of friendship fast.For, prince of all the Vánar race,He in his wisdom knows each placeWhere dwell the fierce gigantic broodWho make the flesh of man their food.To him, O Raghu's son, to himNaught in the world is dark or dim,Where'er the mighty Day-God gleamsResplendent with a thousand beams.
p. 315
He over rocky height and hill,Through gloomy cave, by lake and rill,Will with his Vánars seek the prize,And tell thee where thy lady lies.And he will send great chieftains forthTo east and west and south and north,To seek the distant spot where sheAll desolate laments for thee.He even in Rávan's halls would find

Thy Sítá, gem of womankind.
Yea, if the blameless lady lay     On Meru's loftiest steep.   Or, far removed from light of day,     Where hell is dark and deep,   That chief of all the Vánar race     His way would still explore,   Meet the cowed giants face to face     And thy dear spouse restore."
Footnotes
314:1 Peace, war, marching, halting, sowing 
dissensions, and seeking protection.
314:1b See Book I. Canto XVI.
Next: Canto LXXIV.: Kabandha's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXIV.: KABANDHA'S DEATH.
When wise Kabandha thus had taught
The means to find the dame they sought,And urged them onward in the quest,He thus again the prince addressed:  'This path, O Raghu's son, pursueWhere those fair trees which charm the view,Extending westward far away,The glory of their bloom display,Where their bright leaves Rose-apples show,And the tall Jak and Mango grow.Whene'er you will, those trees ascend,Or the long branches shake and bend.Their savoury fruit like Amrit eat,Then onward speed with willing feet.Beyond this shady forest, deckedWith flowering trees, your course direct.Another grove you then will findWith every joy to take the mind,Like Nandan with its charms displayed,Or Northern Kuru's blissful shade;Where trees distil their balmy juice.And fruit through all the year produce;Where shades with seasons ever fairWith Chaitraratha may compare:

Where trees whose sprays with fruit are bowed
Rise like a mountain or a cloud.There, when you list, from time to time,The loaded trees may Lakshman climb,Or from the shaken boughs supplySweet fruit that may with Amrit vie.The onward path pursuing stillFrom wood to wood, from hill to hill,Your happy eyes at length will restOn Pampá's lotus-covered breast.
Her banks with gentle slope descend,
Nor stones nor weed the eyes offend,And o'er smooth beds of silver sandLotus and lily blooms expand.There swans and ducks and curlews play,And keen-eyed ospreys watch their prey,And from the limpid waves are heardGlad notes of many a water-bird.Untaught a deadly foe to fearThey fly not when a man is near,And fat as balls of butter theyWill, when you list, your hunger stay.Then Lakshman with his shafts will takeThe fish that swim the brook and lake,Remove each bone and scale and fin,Or strip away the speckled skin,And then on iron skewers broilFor thy repast the savoury spoil.

Thou on a heap of flowers shalt rest
And eat the meal his hands have dressedThere shalt thou lie on Pampá's brink.And Lakshman's hand shall give thee drink,Filling a lotus leaf with coolPure water from the crystal pool,To which the opening blooms hare lentThe riches of divinest scent.Beside thee at the close of dayWill Lakshman through the woodland stray,And show thee where the monkeys sleepIn caves beneath the mountain steep.Lurd-voiced as bulls they forth will burstAnd seek the flood, oppressed by thirst;Then rest a while, their wants supplied,Their well-fed bands on Pampá's side.Thou roving there at eve shalt seeRich clusters hang on shrub and tree,And Pampá flushed with roseate glow,And at the view forget thy woe.There shalt thou mark with strange delightEach loveliest flower that blooms by night,While lily buds that shrink from dayTheir tender loveliness display.In that far wild no hand but thineThose peerless flowers in wreaths shall twine:Immortal in their changeless pride,Ne'er fade those blooms and ne'er are dried.There erst on holy thoughts intent

Their days Matanga's pupils spent.
Once for their master food they sought,And store of fruit and berries brought.Then as they laboured through the dellFrom limb and brow the heat-drops fell:Thence sprang and bloomed those wondrous trees:Such holy power have devotees.Thus, from the hermits' heat-drops sprung,Their growth is ever fresh and young.There S'avarí is dwelling yet,Who served each vanished anchoret.
p. 316
Beneath the shade of holy boughsThat ancient votaress keeps her vows.Her happy eyes on thee will fall,O godlike prince, adored by all,And she, whose life is pure from sin,A blissful seat in heaven will win.But cross, O son of Raghu, o'er,And stand on Pampa's western shore.A tranquil hermitage that liesDeep in the woods will meet thine eyes.No wandering elephants invadeThe stillness of that holy shade,But checked by saint Matanga's powerThey spare each consecrated bower.Through many an age those trees have stood

World-famous as Matanga's wood
Still, Raghu's son, pursue thy way:Through shades where birds are vocal stray,Fair as the blessed wood where roveImmortal Gods, or Nandan's grove.Near Pampa eastward, full in sight,Stands Rishyamuka's wood-crowned height.'Tis hard to climb that towering steepWhere serpents unmolested sleep.The free and bounteous, formed of oldBy Brahma, of superior mould,Who sink when day is done to restReclining on that mountain crest,What wealth or joy in dreams they viewAwaking find the vision true.But if a villain stained with crimeThat holy hill presume to climb,The giants in their fury sweepFrom the hill top the wretch asleep.There loud and long is heard the loarOf elephants on Pampa's shore.Who near Matanga's dwelling strayAnd in those waters bathe and play.A while they revel by the flood,Their temples stained with streams like blood.Then wander far away dispersed,Dark as huge clouds before they burst.But ere they part they drink their fillOf bright pure water from the rill.

Delightful to the touch, where meet
Scents of ail flowers divinely sweet,Then speeding from the river sideDeep in the sheltering thicket hide.Then bears and tigers shalt thou viewWhose soft skins show the sapphire's hue,And silvan deer that wander, nighShall harmless from thy presence fly.High in that mountains wooded sideIs a fair cavern deep and wide,Yet hard to enter: piles of rockThe portals-of the cavern block.'  
1
By the eastern door a poolGleams with broad waters fresh and cool,Where stores of roots and fruit abound,And thick trees shade the grassy ground.This mountain cave the virtuous-souledSugríva, and his Vánars hold,And oft the mighty chieftain seeksThe summits of those towering peaks,'   Thus spake Kabandha. high in airHis counsel to the royal pair,Still on his neck that wreath he bore,And radiance like the sun's he wore,Their eyes the princely brothers raisedAnd on that blissful being gazed:'Behold, we go: no more delay;Begin,' they cried,'thy heavenward way.'

'Depart,' Kabandha's voice replied,
'Pursue your search, and bliss betide.'   Thus to the happy chiefs he said,Then on his heavenward journey sped:  Thus once again Kahandha wonA shape that glittered like the sun   Without a spot or stain.Thus bade he Ráma from the airTo great Sugríva's side repair   His friendly love to gain.
Footnotes
316:1 Or as the commentator Titha says, S'ilápidháná, 
rock-covered, may be the name of the cavern.
Next: Canto LXXV.: Savari

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXV.: SAVARI
Thus counselled by their friendly guide
On through the wood the princes hiedPursuing still the eastern roadTo Pampa which Kabandha showed,Where trees that on the mountains grewWith fruit like honey charmed the viewThey rested weary for the nightUpon a mountain's wooded height,Then onward with the dawn they hiedAnd stood, on Pampa's western side.Where S'avan's fair home they viewedDeep in that shady solitude.The princes reached the holy groundWhere noble trees stood thick around,And joying in the lovely viewNear to the aged votress drew.To meet the sons of Raghu came,With hands upraised, the pious dame,And bending low with reverence meetWelcomed them both and pressed theif feet,Then water, as beseems, she gave,Their lips to cool, their feet to lave.To that pure saint who never brokeOne law of duty Ráma--spoke:

   'I trust no cares invade thy peace,
While holy works and zeal increase;That thou content with scanty foodAll touch of ire hast long subdued;That all thy vows are well maintained;
p. 317
While peace of mind is surely gained:That reverence of the saints who taughtThe faithful heart due fruit has brought.'   The aged votaress pure of taint,Revered by every perfect saint,Rose to her feet by Ráma's sideAnd thus in gentle tones replied:'My penance' meed this day I seeComplete, my lord, in meeting thee.This day the fruit of birth I gain,Nor have I served the saints in vain,I reap rich fruits of toil and vow,And heaven itself awaits me now,When I, O chief of men, have doneHonour to thee the godlike one.I feel, great lord, thy gentle eyeMy earthly spirit purify,And I, brave tamer of thy foes,Shall through thy grace in bliss repose.Thy feet by Chitrakáta strayedWhen those great saints whom I obeyed,

In dazzling chariots bright of hue,
Hence to their heavenly mansions flew.As the high saints were borne awayI heard their holy voices say:   'In this pure grove, O devotee,Prince Ráma soon will visit thee.When he and Lakshman seek this shade,Be to thy guests all honour paid.Him shalt thou see, and pass awayTo those blest worlds which ne'er decay.'To me, O mighty chief, the bestOf lofty saints these words addressed.Laid up within my dwelling lieFruits of each sort which woods supply,--Food culled for thee in endless storeFrom every tree on Pampá's shore.'   Thus to her virtuous guest she suedAnd he, with heavenly lore endued,Words such as these in turn addressedTo her with equal knowledge blest:'Danu himself the power has toldOf thy great masters lofty-souled.Now if thou will, mine eyes would fainAssurance of their glories gain.'   She heard the prince his wish declare:Then rose she, and the royal pairOf brothers through the wood she ledThat round her holy dwelling spread.'Behold Matanga's wood' she cried,

'A grove made famous far and wide,
Dark as thick clouds and tilled with herdsOf wandering deer, and joyous birds.In this pure spot each reverend sireWith offerings fed the holy fire.See here the western altar standsWhere daily with their trembling handsThe aged saints, so long obeyedBy me, their gifts of blossoms laid.The holy power, O Raghu's son,By their ascetic virtue won,Still keeps their well-loved altar bright.Filling the air with beams of light.And those seven neighbouring lakes beholdWhich, when the saints infirm and old,Worn out by fasts, no longer sought,Moved hither drawn by power of thought.Look, Ráma, where the devoteesHung their bark mantles on the trees.Fresh from the bath: those garments wetThrough many a day are dripping yet.See, through those aged hermits' powerThe tender spray, this bright-hued flowerWith which the saints their worship paid,Fresh to this hour nor change nor fade.Here thou hast seen each lawn and dell,And heard the tale I had to tell:Permit thy servant, lord, I pray,To cast this mortal shell away,

For I would dwell, this life resigned,
With those great saints of lofty mind,Whom I within this holy shadeWith reverential care obeyed.'   When Ráma and his brother heardThe pious prayer the dame preferred,Filled full of transport and amazedThey marvelled as her words they praised.Then Ráma to the votaress saidWhose holy vows were perfected   'Go, lady, where thou fain wouldst be,O thou who well hast honoured me.'   Her locks in hermit fashion tied,Clad in hark coat and black deer-hide,When Ráma gave consent, the dameResigned her body to the flame.Then like the fire that burns and glows.To heaven the sainted lady rose,In all her heavenly garments dressed,Immortal wreaths on neck and breast,Bright with celestial gems she shoneMost beautiful to look upon,And like the flame of lightning sentA glory through the firmament.That holy sphere the dame attained,By depth of contemplation gained,Where roam high saints with spirits pureIn bliss that shall for aye endure.

Next: Canto LXXVI.: Pampá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXVI.: PAMPÁ.
   When S'avarí had sought the skies
And gained her splendid virtue's prize,Ráma with Lakshman stayed to broodO'er the strange scenes their eyes had viewed.His mind upon those saints was bent,For power and might preeminentAnd he to musing Lakshman spokeThe thoughts that in his bosom woke:
p. 318
'Mine eyes this wondrous home have viewedOf those great saints with souls subdued,Where peaceful tigers dwell and birds,And deer abound in heedless herds.Our feet upon the banks have stoodOf those seven lakes within the wood,Where we have duly dipped, and paidLibations to each royal shade.Forgotten now are thoughts of illAnd joyful hopes my bosom fill.Again my heart is light and gayAnd grief and care have passed away.Come, brother, let us hasten where

Bright Pampá's flood is fresh and fair,
And towering in their beauty nearMount Rishyamúka's heights appear,When, offspring of the Lord of Light,Still fearing Báli's conquering might,With four brave chiefs of Vánar raceSugríva makes his dwelling-place.I long with eager heart to findThat leader of the Vánar kind,For on that chief my hopes dependThat this our quest have prosperous end.'   Thus Ráma spoke, in battle tried,And thus Sumitrá's son replied:'Come, brother, come, and speed away:My spirit brooks no more delay.'Thus spake Sumitrá's son, and thenForth from the grove the king of menWith his dear brother by his sideTo Pampá's lucid waters hied.He gazed upon the winds where grewTrees rich in flowers of every hue.From brake and dell on every sideThe curlew and the peacock cried,And flocks of screaming parrots madeShrill music in the bloomy shade.His eager eyes, as on he went,On many a pool and tree were bent.Inflamed with love he journeyed onTill a fair flood before him shone.

He stood upon the water's side
   Which streams from distant hills suppliedMataranga's * name that water bore:There bathed he from the shelving shore.Then, each on earnest thoughts intent,Still farther on their way they went.But Ráma's heart once more gave wayBeneath his grief and wild dismay.Before him lay the noble floodAdorned with many a lotus bud.On its fair banks As'okas glowed,And all bright trees their blossoms showedGreen banks that silver waves confinedWith lovely groves--were ringed and linedThe crystal waters in their flowShowed level sands that gleamed below.There glittering fish and tortoise played,And bending trees gave pleasant shade.
There creepers on the branches hung
With lover-like embraces clung,There gay Gandharvas loved to meet,And Kinnar sought the calm retreat.There wandering Vakshas* found delight,Snake gods and rovers of the night.Cool were the pleasant waters, gayEach tree with creeper, flower, and spray.There flushed the lotus darkly red,Here their white glory lilies spread,

Here sweet buds showed their tints of blue:
So carpets gleam with many a hue.A grove of Mangoes blossomed nigh,Echoing with the peacock's cry.When Ráma by his brother's sideThe lovely flood of Pampá eyed,Decked like a beauty, fair to seeWith every charm of flower and tree,His mighty heart with woe was rentAnd thus he spoke in wild lament   'Here, Lakshman, on this beauteous shore,Stands, dyed with tints of many an ore,The mountain Rishyamúka brightWith flowery trees that crown each height.Sprung from the chief who, famed of yore,The name of Rikshnrajas bore,Sugríva, chieftain strong and dread,Dwells on that mountain's towering head.Go to him, best of men, and seekThat prince of Vánars on the peak,I cannot longer brook my pain,Or, Sítá lost, my life retain.'   Thus by the pangs of love distressed,     His thoughts on Sítá bent,   His faithful brother he addressed,     And cried in wild lament.   He reached the lovely ground that lay     On Pampá's wooded side,   And told in anguish and dismay,

     The grief he could not hide.
   With listless footsteps faint and slow     His way the chief pursued,   Till Pampá with her glorious show     Of flowering woods he viewed.   Through shades were every bird was found     The prince with Lakshman passed,   And Pampá with her groves around     Burst on his eyes, at last.
Next: Book IV

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
p. 319
BOOK IV. 1
Next: Canto I.: Ráma's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO I.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.
The princes stood by Pampá's side 2
Which blooming lilies glorified.
With troubled heart and sense o'erthrownThere Ráma made his piteous moan.As the fair flood before him layThe reason of the chief gave way;And tender thoughts within him woke,As to Sumitrá's son he spoke:   'How lovely Pampá's waters show,Where streams of lucid crystal flow!What glorious trees o'erhang the floodWhich blooms of opening lotus stud!Look on the banks of Pampá whereThick groves extend divinely fair;And piles of trees, like hills in size.Lift their proud summits to the skies.But thought of Bharat's  
3 pain and toil,
And my dear spouse the giant's spoil,Afflict my tortured heart and pressMy spirit down with heaviness.Still fair to me though sunk in woeBright Pampá and her forest show.Where cool fresh waters charm the sight,

And flowers of every hue are bright,
The lotuses in close arrayTheir passing loveliness display,And pard and tiger, deer and snakeHaunt every glade and dell and brake.Those grassy spots display the hueOf topazes and sapphires' blue,And, gay with flowers of every dye,With richly broidered housings vie.What loads of bloom the high trees crown,Or weigh the bending branches down!And creepers tipped with bud and flowerEach spray and loaded limb o'erpower.Now cool delicious breezes blow,And kindle love's voluptuous glow,
When balmy sweetness fills the air,
And fruit and flowers and trees are fair.Those waving woods, that shine with bloom,Each varied tint in turn assume.Like labouring clouds they pour their showersIn rain or ever-changing flowers.Behold, those forest trees, that standHigh upon rock and table-land,As the cool gales their branches bend,Their floating blossoms downward send.See, Lakshman, how the breezes playWith every floweret on the spray.And sport in merry guise with all

The fallen blooms and those that fall.
See, brother, where the merry breezeShakes the gay boughs of flowery trees,Disturbed amid their toil a throngOf bees pursue him, loud in song.The Koïls, 
1b mad with sweet delight,
The bending trees to dance invite;And in its joy the wild wind singsAs from the mountain cave he springs.On speed the gales in rapid course,And bend the woods beneath their force,Till every branch and spray they bindIn many a tangled knot entwined.What balmy sweets those gales dispenseWith cool and sacred influence!Fatigue and trouble vanish: suchThe magic of their gentle touch.Hark, when the gale the boughs has bentIn woods of honey redolent,Through all their quivering sprays the treesAre vocal with the murmuring bees.The hills with towering summits rise,And with their beauty charm the eyes,Gay with the giant trees which brightWith blossom spring from every height:And as the soft wind gently swaysThe clustering blooms that load the sprays,The very trees break forth and singWith startled wild bees' murmuring.

Thine eyes to yonder Cassias  2b turn
Whose glorious clusters glow and burn.
p. 320
Those trees in yellow robes behold,
Like giants decked with burnished gold.Ah me, Sumitrá's son, the springDear to sweet birds who love and sing,Wakes in my lonely breast the flameOf sorrow as I mourn my dame.Love strikes me through with darts of fire,And wakes in vain the sweet desire.Hark, the loud Koïl swells his throat,And mocks me with his joyful note.I hear the happy wild-cock callBeside the shady waterfall.His cry of joy afflicts my breastBy love's absorbing might possessed.My darling from our cottage heardOne morn in spring this shrill-toned bird,And called me in her joy to hearThe happy cry that charmed her ear.See, birds of every varied voiceAround us in the woods rejoice,On creeper, shrub, and plant alight,Or wing from tree to tree their flight.Each bird his kindly mate has found,And loud their notes of triumph sound,

Blending, in sweetest music like
The distant warblings of the shrike.See how the river banks are linedWith birds of every hue and kind.Here in his joy the Koïl sings,There the glad wild-cock flaps his wings.The bloom, of bright As'okas 
1 where
The song of wild bees fills the air,And the soft whisper of the boughsIncrease my longing for my spouse.
The vernal flush of flower and spray
Will burn my very soul away.What use, what care have I for lifeIf I no more may see my wifeSoft speaker with the glorious hair,And eyes with silken lashes fair?Now is the time when all day longThe Koïls fill the woods with song.And gardens bloom at spring's sweet touchWhich my beloved loved so much.Ah me, Sumitrá's son, the fireOf sorrow, sprung from soft desire.Fanned by the charms the spring time shows,Will burn my heart and end my woes,Whose sad eyes look on each fair tree,But my sweet love no more may see.Ah me, Ah me, from hour to hourLove in my soul will wax in power,

And spring, upon whose charms I gaze,
Whose breath the heat of toil allays,With thoughts of her for whom I strainMy hopeless eyes, increase my pain.As fire in summer rages throughThe forests thick with dry bamboo,So will my fawn eyed love consumeMy soul o'erwhelmed with thoughts of gloom.Behold, beneath each spreading treeThe peacoks dance  
1b in frantic glee,
And, stirred by all the gales that blow,Their tails with jewelled windows glow,Each bird, in happy love elate,Rejoices with his darling mate.But sights like these of joy and peaceMy pangs of hopeless love increase.See on the mountain slope aboveThe peahen languishing with love.Behold her now in amorous danceClose to her consort's side advance.He with a laugh of joy and prideDisplays his glittering pinions wide;And follows through the tangled dellThe partner whom he loves so well.Ah happy bird! no giant's hateHas robbed him of his tender mate;And still beside his loved one heDances beneath the shade in glee.Ah, in this month when flowers are fair

My widowed woe is hard to bear.
See, gentle love a home may findIn creatures of inferior kind.See how the peahen turns to meetHer consort now with love-drawn feet.
p. 321
So, Lakshman, if my large-eyed dear,The child of Janak still were here,She, by love's thrilling influence, led,Upon my breast would lay her head.These blooms I gathered from the boughWithout my love are useless now,A thousand blossoms fair to seeWith passing glory clothe each treeThat hangs its cluster-burthened headNow that the dewy months  
1 are fled,
But, followed by the bees that plyTheir fragrant task, they fall and die.A thousand birds in wild delightTheir rapture-breathing notes unite;Bird calls to bird in joyous strain,And turns my love to frenzied pain,O, if beneath those alien skies,There be a spring where Sítá lies,I know my prisoned love must beTouched with like grief, and mourn with me.But ah, methinks that dreary clime.

Knows not the touch of spring's sweet time.
How could my black eyed love sustain,Without her lord, so dire a pain?Or if the sweet spring come to herIn distant lands a prisoner,How may his advent and her metOn every side with taunt and threat?Ah, if the springtide's languor cameWith sort enchantment o'er my dame,My darling of the lotus eye,My gently speaking love, would die;For well my spirit knows that sheCan never live bereft of meWith love that never wavered yetMy Sítá's heart, on me is set,Who, with a soul that ne'er can stray,With equal love her love repay.In vain, in vain the soft wind bringsSweet blossoms on his balmy wings;Delicious from his native snow,To me like fire he seems to glow,O, how I loved a breeze like thisWhen darling Sítá shared the bliss!But now in vain for me it blowsTo fan the fury of my woes.That dark-winged bird that sought the skiesForetelling grief with warning cries,Sits on the tree where buds are gay,And pours glad music from the spray.

That rover of the fiels of air
Will aid my love with friendly care,And me with gracious pity guide
To my large-eved Videhan's side.  
1b
Hark, Lakshman, how the woods around
With love-inspiring chants resound,Where birds in every bloom-crowned treePour forth their amorous minstrelsy.As though an eager gallant wooedA gentle maid by love subdued,Enamoured of her flowers the beeDarts at the wind-rocked Tila tree.  
2b
As'oka, brightest tree that grows,That lends a pang to lovers' woes,Hangs out his gorgeous bloom in scornAnd mocks me as I weep forlorn.O Lakshman, turn thine eye and seeEach blossom-laden Mango tree,Like a young lover gaily dressedWhom fond desire forbids to restLook, son of Queen Sumitrá throughThe forest glades of varied hue,Where blooms are bright and grass is greenThe Kinnars  
3b with their loves are seen.
See, brother, see where sweet and brightThose crimson lotus charm the sight,And o'er the flood a radiance throwFair as the morning's roseate glow.

See, Pampá, most divinely sweet,
The swan's and mallard's loved retreat,Shows her glad waters bright and clear,Where lotuses their heads uprearFrom the pure wave, and charm the viewWith mingled tints of red and blue.Each like the morning's early beamsReflected in the crystal gleams;And bees in their sweet toil intentWeigh down each tender filamentThere with gay lawns the wood recedes;There wildfowl sport amid the reeds,There roedeer stand upon the brink,And elephants descend to dunk.The rippling waves which winds make fleetAgainst the bending lilies beat,And opening bud and flower and stemGleam with the drops that hang on them.Life has no pleasure left for meWhile my dear queen I may not see,
p. 322
Who loved so well those blooms that vieWith the full splendour of her eye,O tyrant Love, who will not letMy bosom for one hour forgetThe lost one whom I yearn to meet,Whose words were ever kind and sweet.

Ah, haply might my heart endure
This hopeless love that knows not cure,If spring with all his trees in flowerAssailed me not with ruthless power.Each lovely scene, each sound and sightWherein, with her. I found delight,Has lost the charm so sweet of yore,And glads my widowed heart no more.On lotus buds I seem to gaze,Or blooms that deck Palás'a  
1 sprays;
But to my tortured memory riseThe glories of my darling's eyes.Cool breezes through the forest strayGathering odours on their way,Enriched with all the rifled scentOf lotus flower and filament.Their touch upon my temples fallsAnd Sitá's fragrant breath recalls.Now look, dear brother, on the rightOf Pampá towers a mountain heightWhere fairest Cassia trees unfoldThe treasures of their burnished gold.Proud mountain king this woody sideWith myriad ores is decked and dyed,And as the wind-swept blossoms fallTheir fragrant dust is stained with all.To yon high lands thy glances turn:With pendent fire they flash and burn,Where in their vernal glory blaze

Palasa flowers on leafless sprays.
O Lakshinan, look! on Pampá's sideWhat fair trees rise in blooming pride!What climbing plants above them show
Or hang their flowery garlands low
See how the amorous creeper ringsThe wind-rocked trees to which she clings,As though a dame by love impelledWith clasping arms her lover held.Drunk with the varied scents that fillThe balmy air. from hill to hill,From grove to grove, from tree to tree,The joyous wind is wandering free.These gay trees wave their branches bentBy blooms, of honey redolent.There, slowly opening to the day,Buds with dark lustre deck the spray.The wild bee rests a moment whereEach tempting flower is sweet and fair,Then, coloured by the pollen dyes,Deep in some odorous blossom lies.Soon from his couch away he springs:To other trees his course he wings,And tastes the honeyed blooms that growWhere Pampá's lucid waters flow.See, Lakshman, see, how thickly spreadWith blossoms from the trees o'erhead,That grass the weary traveller woos

With couches of a thousand hues,
And beds on every height arrayedWith red and yellow tints are laid,No longer winter chills the earth:A thousand flowerets spring to birth,And trees in rivalry assumeTheir vernal garb of bud and bloom.How fair they look, how bright and gayWith tasselled flowers on every spray!While each to each proud challenge flingsBorne in the song the wild bee sings.That mallard by the river edgeHas bathed amid the reeds and sedge:Now with his mate he fondly playsAnd fires my bosom as I gaze.   Mandákini  
1b is far renowned:
No lovelier flood on earth is found;But all her fairest charms combinedIn this sweet stream enchant the mind,0, if my love were here to lookWith me upon this lovely brook,Ne'er for Ayodhyá would I pine,Or wish that Indra's lot were mine.If by my darling's side I strayedO'er the soft turf which decks the glade,Each craving thought were sweetly stilled,Each longing of my soul fulfilled.But, now my love is far away,Those trees which make the woods so gay,

In all their varied beauty dressed,
Wake thoughts of anguish in my breast.   That lotus-covered stream beholdWhose waters run so fresh and cold,
p. 323
Sweet rill, the wildfowl's loved resort,Where curlew, swan, and diver sport;Where with his consort plays the drake,And tall deer love their thirst to slake,While from each woody bank is heardThe wild note of each happy bird.The music of that joyous quireFills all my soul with soft desire;And, as I hear, my sad thoughts flyTo Sítá of the lotus eye,Whom, lovely with her moonbright cheek,In vain mine eager glances seek.Now turn, those chequered lawns surveyWhere hart and hind together stray.Ah, as they wander at their willMy troubled breast with grief they fill,While torn by hopeless love I sighFor Sítá of the fawn-like eye.If in those glades where, touched by spring,Gay birds their amorous ditties sing,Mine own beloved I might see,Then, brother, it were well with me:

If by my side she wandered still,
And this cool breeze that stirs the rillTouched with its gentle breath the browsOf mine own dear Videhan spouse.For, Lakshman, O how blest are thoseOn whom the breath of Pampá blows,Dispelling all their care and gloomWith sweets from where the lilies bloom!How can my gentle love remainAlive amid the woe and pain,Where prisoned far away she lies,--My darling of the lotus eyes?How shall I dare her sire to greetWhose lips have never known deceit?How stand before the childless kingAnd meet his eager questioning?When banished by my sire's decree,In low estate, she followed me.So pure, so true to every vow,Where is my gentle darling now?How can I bear my widowed lot,And linger on where she is not,Who followed when from home I fledDistracted, disinherited?My spirit sinks in hopeless painWhen my fond glances yearn in vainFor that dear face with whose bright eyeThe worshipped lotus scarce can vie.Ah when, my brother, shall I hear

That voice that rang so soft and clear,
When, sweetly smiling as she spoke,From her dear lips gay laughter broke?When worn with toil and love I strayedWith Sítá through the forest shade,No trace of grief was seen in her,My kind and thoughtful comforter.How shall my faltering tongue relateTo Queen Kaus'alyá Sítá's fate?How answer when in wild despair
She questions, Where is Sítá, where?
Haste, brother, haste: to Bharat hie,On whose fond love I still rely.My life can be no longer borne,Since Sítá from my side is torn.'   Thus like a helpless mourner, bentBy sorrow, Rama made lament;And with wise counsel Lakshman triedTo soothe his care, and thus replied:   'O best of men, thy grief oppose,Nor sink beneath thy weight of woes.Not thus despond the great and pureAnd brave like thee, but still endure.Reflect what anguish wrings the heartWhen loving souls are forced to part;And, mindful of the coming pain,Thy love within thy breast restrain,For earth, though cooled by wandering streams,

Lies scorched beneath the midday beams,
Rávan his steps to hell may bend,Or lower yet in flight descend;But be tbou sure, O Raghu's son,Avenging death he shall not shun.Rise, Ráma, rise: the search begin,And track the giant foul with sin.Then shall the fiend, though far he fly,Resign his prey or surely die.Yea, though the trembling monster hideWith Sítá close to Diti's  
1 side,
E'en there, unless he yield the prize,Slain by this wrathful hand he dies.Thy heart with strength and courage stay,And cast this weakling mood away.Our fainting hopes in vain reviveUnless with firm resolve we strive.The zeal that fires the toiler's breastMid earthly powers is first and best.Zeal every check and bar defies,And wins at length the loftiest prize,In woe and danger, toil and care,Zeal never yields to weak despair.With zealous heart thy task begin,And thou once more thy spouse shalt win.Cast fruitless sorrow from thy soul,Nor let this love thy heart control.Forget not all thy sacred lore,But be thy noble self once more.'

    He heard, his bosom rent by grief,
The counsel of his brother chief;Crushed in his heart the maddening pain,And rose resolved and strong again.Then forth upon his journey wentThe hero on his task intent,Nor thought of Pampá's lovely brook,
p. 324
Or trees which murmuring breezes shook,Though on dark woods his glances fell,On waterfall and cave and dell;And still by many a care distressedThe son of Raghu onward pressed.As some wild elephant elate     Moves through the woods in pride,So Lakshman with majestic gait     Strode by his brother's side.He, for his lofty spirit famed,     Admonished and condoled;Showed Raghu's son what duty claimed,     And bade his heart be bold.Then as the brothers strode apace     To Rishyamúka's height,The sovereign of the Vánar race 
1
     Was troubled at the sight.As on the lofty hill he strayed     He saw the chiefs draw near:

A while their glorious forms surveyed,
     And mused in restless fear.His slow majestic step he stayed     And gazed upon the pair.And all his spirit sank dismayed     By fear too great to bear.When in their glorious might the best     Of royal chiefs came nigh,The Vánars in their wild unrest     Prepared to turn and fly.They sought the hermit's sacred home  
2
     For peace and bliss ordained,And there, where Vánars loved to roam.     A sure asylum gained.
Footnotes
319:1 Or Kishkindhá Kánda. Kishkindhá, the city of 
Báli the elder brother and enemy of Sugriva, is 
supposed to have been situated north of Mysore.
319:2 Pampá is said by the commentator to be the name 
both of a lake and a brook which flows into it. The 
brook is said to rise in the hill Rishyamúka.
319:3 Who was acting as Regent for Ráma and leading 

an ascetic life while he mourned for his absent brother.
319:1b The Indian Cuckoo.
319:2b The Cassia Fistula or Amaltás is a splendid tree 
like a giant laburnum covered with a profusion of 
chains and tassels of gold. Dr. Roxburgh well describes it as "uncommonly beautiful when in flower, few trees surpassing it in the elegance of its numerous long pendulous racemes of large bright-yellow flowers intermixed with the young lively green foliage." It is remarkable also for its curious cylindrical black seed-pods about two feet long, which are called monkeys' walking-sticks.
320:1 "The Jonesia Asoca is a tree of con- siderable 
size, native of southern India. It blossoms in February 
and March with large erect compact clusters of flowers varying in colour from pale-orange to scarlet, almost to be mistaken, on a hasty glance, for immense trusses of bloom of an Ixora. Mr. Fortune considered this tree, when in full bloom superior in beauty even to the Amherstia. 
The first time I saw the Asoca in flower was on the hill 
where the famous rock-cut temple of Kali is situated, and a large concourse of natives had assembled for the celebration of some Hindoo festival. Before proceeding 

to the temple the Mahratta women gathered from two 
trees, which were flowering somewhat below, each a fine truss of blossom, and inserted it in the hair at the back of her head. .........As they moved about in groups it, is impossible to imagine a more delightful effect than the rich scarlet bunches of flowers presented on their fine glossy jet-black hair". FIRMINGER, Gardening for India.
320:1b No other word can express the movements of 
peafowl under the influence of pleasing excitement, 
especially when after the long drought they hear the welcome roar of the thunder and feel that the rain is near.
321:1 The Dewy Season is one of the six ancient 
seasons of the Indian year, lasting from the middle of 
January to the middle or March.
321:1b Ráma appears to mean that on a former occasion 
a crow flying high overhead was an omen that indicated 
his approaching separation from Sítá; and that now the same bird's perching on a tree near him may be regarded as a happy augury that she will soon be restored to her husband.
321:2b A tree with beautiful and fragrant blossoms.

321:3b A race of semi-divine musicians attached to the 
service of Kuvera, represented as centaurs reversed with 
human, figures and horses' heads.
322:1 Butea Frondosa. A tree that bears a profusion of 
brilliant red flowers which appear before the leaves. 
I omit five s'lokas which contain nothing but a list of 
trees for which, with one or two exceptions, there are no equivalent names in English. The following is Gorresio's translation of the corresponding passage in the Bengal recension:-- 
"Oh come risplendono in questa stagione di primavera i 
vitici, le galedupe, le bassie, le dalbergie, i diospyri...le tile, le michelie, le rott*lerie, le pentaptere ed i pterospermi, i bombaci, le grislee, gli abri, gli amaranti e le dalbergie; i sirii, le galedupe, le barringtonie ed i palmizi, i xanthoeymi, il pepebetel, le verbosine e le ticaie, le nauclee le erythrine, gli asochi, e le tapie fanno d'ogni intorno pompa de' lor fiori." 
322:1b A sacred stream often mentioned in the course 
of the poem, see Book II. Cauto XCV.
323:1 A daughter of Daksha who became one of the wives of Kas'yapa and mother of the Daityas. She is 
termed the general mother of Titans and malignant 

beings. See Book I Cantos XLV, XLVI.
Next: Canto II.: Sugríva's Alarm.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO II.: SUGRÍVA'S ALARM.
Sugríva moved by wondering awe
The high-souled sons of Raghu saw,In all their glorious arms arrayed;And grief upon his spirit weighed.To every quarter of the skyHe turned in fear his anxious eye,And roving still from spot to spotWith troubled steps he rested not.He durst not, as he viewed the pair,Resolve to stand and meet them there:
And drooping cheer and quailing breast
The terror of the chief confessed.While the great fear his bosom shook,Brief counsel with his lords he took;Each gain and danger closely scanned,What hope in flight, what power to stand,While doubt and fear his bosom rent,On Raghu's sons his eyes he bent,And with a spirit ill at easeAddressed his lords in words like these:   'Those chiefs with wandering steps invadeThe shelter of our pathless shade,And hither come in fair disguise

Of hermit garb as Báli's spies.'
   Each lord beheld with troubled heartThose masters of the bowman's art,And left the mountain side to seekSure refuge on a loftier peak.The Vánar chief in rapid flightFound shelter on a towering height,And all the band with one accordWere closely gathered round their lord.Their course the same, with desperate leapEach made his way from steep to steep,And speeding on in wild careerFilled every height with sudden fear.Each heart was struck with mortal dread,As on their course the Vánars sped,While trees that crowned the steep were bentAnd crushed beneath them as they went.As in their eager flight they pressedFor safety to each mountain crest,The wild confusion struck with fearTiger and cat and wandering deer.The lords who watched Sugríva's willWere gathered on the royal hill,And all with reverent hands upraisedUpon their king and leader gazed.Sugríva feared some evil planned,Some train prepared by Báli's hand.But skilled in words that charm and teach,Thus Hanumán  
1b began his speech:

   Dismiss, dismiss thine idle fear,
Nor dread the power of Báli here.For this is Malaya's glorious hill  
2b
Where Bálí's might can work no ill.I look around but nowhere seeThe hated foe who made thee flee,Fell Báli, fierce in form and face:Then fear not, lord of Vánar race.Alas, in thee I clearly findThe weakness of the Vánar kind,
p. 325
That loves from thought to thought to range,Fix no belief and welcome change.Mark well each hint and sign and scan,Discreet aud wise, thine every plan.How may a king, with sense denied,The subjects of his sceptre guide?'    Hanúmán,  
1 wise in hour of need,
Urged on the chief his prudent rede.His listening ear Sugríva bent,And spake in words more excellent:    'Where is the dauntless heart that freeFrom terror's chilling touch can seeTwo stranger warriors, strong as those,Equipped with swords and shafts and bows,With mighty arms and large full eyes,Like glorious children of the skies

Báli my foe, I ween, has sent
These chiefs to aid his dark intent.Hence doubt and fear disturb me still,For thousands serve a monarch's will,In borrowed garb they come, and thoseWho walk disguised are counted foes.With secret thoughts they watch their time,And wound fond hearts that fear no crimeMy foe in state affairs is wise,And prudent kings have searching eyes.By other hands they strike the foe:By meaner tools the truth they know.Now to those stranger warriors turn,And, less than king, their purpose learn.Mark well the trick and look of each;Observe his form and note his speech.With care their mood and temper sound,And, if their minds be friendly found,With courteous looks and words beginTheir confidence and love to win.Then as my friend and envoy speak,And question where the strangers seek.Ask why equipped with shaft and bowThrough this wild maze of wood they go.If does, O chief, as first appearPure of all guile, in heart sincere,Detect in speech and look the sinAnd treachery that lurk within.'    He spoke: the Wind-God's son obeyed.

With ready zeal he sought the shade,
And reached with hasty steps the woodWhere Ragbu's son and Lakshman stood. 
2
The envoy in his faithful breastPondered Sugrivá's high behest.From Rishyamúka's peak he hiedAnd placed him by the princes' side.The Wind-God's son with cautious artHad laid his Vánar form apart,And wore, to cheat the strangers eyes,A wandering mendicant's disguise.  
1b
Before the heroes' feet he bentAnd did obeisance reverent,And spoke, the gloirious pair to praise,His words of truth in courteous phrase,High honour duly paid, the bestOf all the Vánar kind addressed,With free accord and gentle grace,Those glories of their warrior race:   'O hermits, blest in vows, who shineLike royal saints or Gods divine,O best of young ascetics, sayHow to this spot you found your way,Scaring the troops of wandering deerAnd silvan things that harbour hereSearching amid the trees that growWhere Pampá's gentle waters flow.And lending from your brows a gleam

Of glory to the lovely stream.
Who are you, say, so brave and fair.Clad in the bark which hermits wear?I see you have the frequent sigh,I see the deer before you fly.While you, for strength and valour dread,The earth, like lordly lions, tread,Each bearing in his hand a bow,Like Indra's own, to slay the foe,With the grand paces of bull,So bright and young and beautifulThe mighty arms you raise appearLike trunks which elephants uprear,And as you move this mountain-king  
2b
Is glorious with the light you bring.How have you reached, like Gods in face,Best lords of earth, this lonely place,
p. 326
With tresses coiled in hermit guise, 1
And splendours of those lotus eyes?As God's who leave their heavenly sphere,Alike your beauteous forms appear.Tne Lords of Day and Night 
2 might thus
Stray from the skies to visit us.Heroic youth, so broad of chest,Fair with the beauty of the Blest,With lion shoulders, tall and strong,

Like bulls who lead the lowing throng.
Your arms, unmatched for grace and length,With massive clubs may vie in strength.Why do no gauds those limbs adornWhere priceless gems were meetly worn?Each noble youth is fit, I deem,To guard this earth, as lord supreme,With all her woods and seas, to reignFrom Meru's peak to Vindhya's chain.Your smooth bows decked with dyes and goldAre glorious in their masters' hold,And with the arms of Indra  
3 vie
Which diamond splendours beautify.Your quivers glow with golden sheen,Well stored with arrows fleet and keen,Each gleaming like a flery snakeThat joys the foeman's life to take.As serpents cast their sloughs awayAnd all their new born sheen display,So flash your mighty swords inlaidWith burning gold on hilt and blade.Why are you silent, heroes? WhyMy questions hear nor deign reply?Sugríva, lord of virtuous mind.The foremost of the Vánar kind.An exile from his royal state,Roams through the land disconsolate.I Hanumán, of Vánar race,Sent by the king have sought this place,

For he, the pious, just, and true.
In friendly league would join with you.Know, godlike youths, that I am oneOf his chief lords, the Wind-God's son.With course unchecked I roam will,And now from Rishyamúka's hill.To please his heart, his hope to speed,I came disguised in beggar's weed.'   Thus Hanumán, well trained in loreOf language spoke, and said no more.The son of Raghu joyed to hearThe envoy's speech, and bright of cheerHe turned to Lakshman by his side,And thus in words of transport cried:   'The counselor we now beholdOf King Sugríva righteous souled.
His face I long have yearned to see,
And now his envoy comes to meWith sweetest words in courteous phraseAnswer this mighty lord who slaysHis foemen, by Sugríva sent.This Vánar chief most eloquent.For one whose words so sweetly flowThe whole Rig-veda  
1b needs must know,
And in his well-trained memory storeThe Yajush and the Sáman's lore.He must have bent his faithful earAll grammar's varied rules to hear.

For his long speech how well he spoke!
In all its length no rule he broke.In eye, on brow, in all his faceThe keenest look no guile could trace.No change of hue, no pose of limbGave sign that aught was false in him.Concise, unfaltering, sweet and clear,Without a word to pain the ear.From chest to throat, nor high nor low,His accents came in measured flow.How well he spoke with perfect artThat wondrous speech that charmed the heart,With finest skill and order gracedIn words that knew nor pause nor haste!That speech, with consonants that springFrom the three seats of uttering, 
2b
Would charm the spirit of a foeWhose sword is raised for mortal blow.How may a ruler's plan succeedWho lacks such envoy good at need?How fail, if one whose mind is storedWith gifts so rare assist his lord?What plans can fail, with wisest speechOf envoy's lips to further each?'   Thus Ráma spoke: and Lakshman, taughtIn all the art that utters thought,To King Súgríva's learned spyThus made his eloquent reply:'Full well we know the gifts that grace

Sugríva, lord of Vánar race,
And hither turn our wandering feetThat we that high-souled king may meetSo now our pleasant task shall beTo do the words he speaks by thee.'   His prudent speech the Vánar heard,And all his heart with joy was stirred.And hope that league with them would bringRedress and triumph to his king.
p. 327
Footnotes
324:1 Sugríva, the ex-king of the Vánars, foresters, or 
monkeys, an exile from his home, wandering about the 
mountain Rishyamúka with his four faithful ex-ministers.
324:2 The hermitage of the Saint Matauga which his 
curse prevented Báli, the present king of the Vánars, 
from entering. The story is told at length in Canto XI. of this Book.
324:1b Hanumán, Sugríva's chief general, was the son 
of the God of Wind. See Book I, Canto XVI.

324:2b A range of hills in Malabar; the Western Ghats 
in the Deccan.
325:1 Válmíki makes the second vowel in this name long or short to suit the exigencies of the verse. Other 
Indian poets have followed his example, and the same licence will be used in this translation.
325:2 I omit a recapitulatory and interpolated verse in a 
different metre, which is as follows:--Reverencing with 
the words, So be it, the speech of the greatly terrified and unequalled monkey king, the magnanimous Hanúmán then went where (stood) the very mighty Ráma with Lakshman.
325:1b The semi divine Hanuma'n posseses. like the 
Gods and demons, the power of wearing all shapes at 
will, He is one of the Kámarúpís. 
    Like Milton's good and bad angels 
    "as they please
    They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size    Assume as likes them best, coudense or rare."

325:2b Himálaya is of course par excellence the 
Monarch of mountains, but the complimentary title is 
frequently given to other hills as here to Malaya.
326:1 Twisted up in a matted coil as was the custom of 
ascetics.
326:2 The sun and the moon.
326:3 The rainbow.
326:1b The Vedas are four in number, the Rich or Rig-veda, the Yajush or Yajur-veda; the Sáman or Sáma-
veda*, and the Atharvan or Atharva-veda. See p. 3. Note.
326:2b The chest, the throat, and the head.
Next: Canto IV: Lakshman's Reply.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IV: LAKSHMAN'S REPLY.
Cheered by the words that Ráma spoke,
Joy in the Vánar's breast awoke,And, as his friendly mood he knew,His thoughts to King Sugriva flew:' Again,' he mused,'my high-sou'ed lordShall rule, to kingly state restored;Since one so mighty comes to save,And freely gives the help we crave."Then joyous Hanumán, the bestOf all the Vánar kind, addressedThese words to Ráma, trained of yoreIn all the arts of speakers' lore:  
1
'Why do your feet this forest treadBy silvan life inhabited,This awful maze of tree and thornWhich Pampá's flowering groves adorn?   He spoke: obedient to the eyeOf Ráma Lakshman made reply,The name and fortune to unfoldOf Raghu's son the lofty-souled:'True to the law, of fame unstained,The glorious Das'aratha reigned.And, steadfast in his duty, long

Kept the four castes  2from scathe and wrong.
Through his wide realm his will was done,
And, loved by all, he hated none.Just to each creature great and small,Like the Good Sire he cared for all.The Agnishtom, 
3 as priests advised,
And various rites he solemnized.Where ample largess ever paidThe Brahmans for their holy aid.Here Ráma stands, his heir by birth,Whose name is glorious in the earth:Sure refuge he of all oppressed,Most faithful to his sire's behest.He, Das'aratha's eldest bornWhom gifts above the rest adorn,Lord of each high imperial sign,  
1b
The glory of his kingly line,Reft of his right, expelled from home,Came forth with me the woods to roam,And Sitá too, his faithful dame,Forth with her virtuous husband came,Like the sweet light when day is doneStill cleaving to her lord the sun.And me his sweet perfections drewTo follow as his servant true.Named Lakshman, brother of my lordOf grateful heart with knowledge storedMost meet is he all bliss to share,

Who makes the good of all his care.
While, power and lordship caat away,In the wild wood he chose to stay,A giant came,--his name unknown,--And stole the princess left alone.Then Dití's son  
2b who, cursed of yore.
The semblance of a Rakshas wore,To King Sugríva bade us turnThe robber's name and home to learn.For he, the Vánar chief, would knowThe dwelling of our secret foe.Such words of hope spake Dití's son,And sought the heaven his deeds had won.Thou hast my tale. From first to lastThine ears have heard whate'er has past.Rama the mighty lord and IFor refuge to Sugríva fly.The prince whose arm bright glory gained.O'er the whole earth as monarch reigned,And richest gifts to others gave,Is come Sugríva's help to crave;Son of a king the surest friendOf virtue, him who loved to lendHis succour to the suffering weak,Is come Sugríva's aid to seek.Yes, Raghu's son whose matchless handProtected all this sea-girt land,The virtuous prince, my holy guide,For refuge seeks Sugríva's side.

His favour sent on great and small
Should ever save and prosper all.He now to win Sugríva's graceHas sought his woodland dwelling-place.
p. 328
Son of a king of glorious fame;--Who knows not Das'aratha's name?--From whom all princes of the earthReceived each honour due to worth;--Heir of that best of earthly kings,Ráma the prince whose glory ringsThrough realms below and earth and skies,For refuge to Sugríva flies.Nor should the Vánar king refuseThe boon for which the suppliant sues,But with his forest legions speedTo save him in his utmost need.   Sumitrá's son, his eyes bedewedWith piteous tears, thus sighed and sued.Then, trained in all the arts that guideThe speaker, Hanumán replied:   'Yea, lords like you of wisest thought,Whom happy fate has hither brought,Who vanquish ire and rule each sense,Must of our lord have audience.Reft of his kingdom, sad, forlorn,Once Báli's hate now Báli's scorn,

Defeated, severed from his spouse,
Wandering under forest boughs,Child of the Sun, our lord and kingSugríva will his succours bring,And all our Vánar hosts combinedWill trace the dame you long to find.'   With gentle tone and winning graceThus spake the chief of Vánar race,And then to Raghu's son he cried:'Come, haste we to Sugrivá's side.'   He spoke, and for his words so sweetGood Lakshman' paid all honour meet;Then turned and cried to Raghu's son:'Now deem thy task already done,Because this chief of Vánar kind,Son of the God who rules the wind,Declares Sugríva's self would beAssisted in his need by thee.Bright gleams of joy his cheek o'erspreadAs each glad word of hope he said;And ne'er will one so valiant deignTo cheer our hearts with hope in vain.'   He spoke, and Hanúmán the wiseCast off his mendicant disguise,And took again his Vánar form,Son of the God of wind and storm.High on his ample back in hasteBaghu's heroic sons he placed.And turned with rapid steps to find

The sovereign of the Vánar kind.
Footnotes
327:1 "In our own metrical romances, or wherever a 
poem is meant not for readers but for chanters and oral 
reciters, these formulae, to meet the same recurring case, exist by scores. Thus every woman in these metrical romances who happens to be young, is described as "so bright of ble," or complexion; always a man goes "the mountenance of a mule" before he overtakes or is overtaken. And so on through. a vast bead-roll of cases. In the same spirit Homer has his 
eternal δ•α• •ποδρα ιδων, or τον δ•απα¼ειβο¼ενος προσεφη, &c. 
To a reader of sensibility, such recurrences wear an air 
of child-like simplicity, beautifully recalling the features of Homer's primitive age. But they would have appeared faults to all commonplace critics in literary ages." 
DE QUINCEY. Homer and the Homeridæ.
327:2 Brahmans the sacerdotal caste. Kshatriyas the 
royal and military, Vaisyas the mercantile, and Sudras 

the servile.
327:3 A protracted sacrifice extending over several 
days. See Book I. p, 21 Note.
327:1b Possessed of all the auspicious personal marks that indicate capacity of universal sovereignty. See 
Book I. p. 2, and, Note 3.
327:2b Kabandha. See Book III. Canto LXXlII.
Next: Canto V.: The League.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO V.: THE LEAGUE.
From Rishyamáka's rugged side
To Malaya's hills the Vánar hied
And to his royal chieftain there
Announced the coming of the pair:'See here with Lakshman' Ráma standsIllustrious in a hundred lands.Whose valiant heart will never quailAlthough a thousand foes assail;King Das'aratha's son, the graceAnd glory of Ikshváku's race.Obedient to his father's willHe cleaves to sacred duty still.With rites of royal pomp and prideHis sire the Fire-God gratified;Ten hundred thousand kine he freed,And priests enriched with ample meed;And the broad land protected, famedFor truthful lips and passions tamed.Through woman's guile his son has madeHis dwelling in the forest shade,Where, as he lived with every senseSubdued in hermit abstinence,Fierce Rávan' stole his wife, and he

Is come a suppliant, lord, to thee.
Now let all honour due be paidTo these great chiefs who seek thine aid.'   Thus spake the Vánar prince, and, stirredWith friendly thoughts, Sugríva heard.The light of joy his face o'erspread,And thus to Raghu's son he said:'O Prince, in rules of duty trained,Caring for all with love unfeigned,Hanúmán's tongue has truly shownThe virtues that are thine alone.My chiefest glory, gain, and bliss,O stranger Prince, I reckon this,That Raghu's son will condescendTo seek the Vánar for his friend.If thou my true ally wouldst beAccept the pledge I offer thee,This hand in sign of friendship take,And bind the bond we ne'er will break.'   He spoke, and joy thrilled Ráma's breast;Sugríva's hand he seized and pressedAnd, transport beaming from his eye,Held to his heart his new ally.In wanderer's weed disguised no more,His proper form Hanúmán wore.Then, wood with wood engendering, 
1 came
Neath his deft hands the kindled flame.Between the chiefs that fire he placed

p. 329
With wreaths of flowers and worship graced.
And round its blazing glory wentThe friends with slow steps reverent.   Thus each to other pledged and boundIn solemn league new transport found.And bent upon his dear allyThe gaze he ne'er could satisfy.'Friend of my soul art thou: we shareEach other's joy, each other's care;'To us the bliss that thrilled his breastSugriva Raghu's son addressed.From a high Sál a branch he toreWhich many a leaf and blossom bore,And the fine twigs beneath them laidA seat for him and Ráma made.Then Hanumán with joyous mind,Son of the God who rules the wind,To Lakshman gave, his seat to be,The gay branch of a Sandal tree.Then King Sugriva with his eyesStill trembling with the sweet surpriseOf the great joy he could not hide,To Raghu's noblest scion cried:'O Ráma, racked with woe and fear,Spurned by my foes, I wander here.Reft of my spouse, forlorn I dwellHere in my forest citadel.

Or wild with terror and distress
Roam through the distant wilderness.Vext by my brother Báli longMy soul has borne the scathe and wrong.Do thou, whose virtues all revere,Release me from my woe and fear.From dire distress tby friend to freeIs a high task and worthy thee.'   He spoke, and Raghu's son who knewAll sacred duties men should do.The friend of justice, void of guile,Thus answered with a gentle smile:'Great Vánar, friends who seek my aidStill find their trust with fruit repaid.Báli, thy foe, who stole awayThy wife this vengeful hand shall slay.These shafts which sunlike flash and burn,Winged with the feathers of the *ern,Each swift of flight and sure and dread,With even knot and pointed head,Fierce as the crashing fire-bolt sentBy him who rules the firmament, 
1
Shall reach thy wicked foe and like
Infuriate serpents hiss and strike.
Thou, Vánar King, this day shalt seeThe foe who long has injured theeLie, like a shattered mountain, low,Slain by the tempest of my bow.'

   Thus Ráma spake: Sugriva heard,
And mighty joy his bosom stirred:As thus his champion he addressed:'Now by thy favour, first and bestOf heroes, shall thy friend obtainHis realm and darling wife again   Recovered from the foe.Check thou mine elder brother's might;That ne'er again his deadly spiteMay rob me of mine ancient right,   Or vex my soul with woe.'The league was struck, a league to bringTo Sítá fiends, and Vánar king  
1b
   Apportioned bliss and bale.Through her left eye quick throbbings shot, 
2b
Glad signs the lady doubted not,   That told their hopeful tale.The bright left eye of Báli feltAn inauspicious throb that dealt   A deadly blow that day.The fiery left eyes of the crewOf demons felt the throb, and knew   The herald of dismay.
Footnotes

328:1 Fire for sacred purposes is produced by the 
attrition of two pieces of wood. In marriage and other 
solemn covenants fire is regarded as the holy witness in whose presence the agreement is made. Spenser in a description of a marriage, has borrowed from them the Roman rite what he (illegible) sacrificial fire: 
p. 329 
"His owne two hands the holy knots did knitThat none but death forever can divide.His owne two hands, for such a turn most fit,The *ing fire did kindle and provide.'   Faery Queen, Book 1 XII. 37
329:1 Indra
Next: Canto VI.: The Tokens.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VI.: THE TOKENS.
With joy that sprang from hope restored
To Ráma spake the Vánar lord:'I know, by wise Hanúmán taught,Why thou the lonely wood hast sought,Where with thy brother Lakshman thouHast sojourned, bound by hermit vow;Have heard how Sitá, Janak's child,Was stolen in the pathless wild,How by a roving Rákshas sheWeeping was reft from him and thee;How, bent on death, the giant slewThe vulture king, her guardian true,And gave thy widowed breast to knowA solitary moaner's woe.But soon, dear Prince, thy heart shall beFrom every trace of sorrow free;
p. 330
For I thy darling will restore,Lost like the prize of holy lore. 
1
Yea, though in heaven the lady dwell,Or prisoned in the depths of hell,My friendly care her way shall track

And bring thy ransomed darling back.
Let this my promise soothe thy care,Nor doubt the words I truly swear.Saints, fiends, and dwellers of the skiesShall find thy wife a bitter prize,Like the rash child who rues too lateThy treacherous lure of poisoned cate.No longer, Prince, thy loss deplore:Thy darling wife will I restore.'Twas she I saw: my heart infersThat shrinking form was doubtless hers.Which gaint Rávan', fierce and dread,Bore swiftly through the clouds o'erheadStill writhing in his strict embraceLike helpless queen oft serpent race, 
2
And from her lips that sad voice cameShrieking thine own and Lakshman's name.High on a hill she saw me standWith comrades twain on either hand.Her outer robe to earth she threw,And with it sent her anklets too.We saw the glittering tokens fall,We found them there and kept them all.These will I bring: perchance thine eyesThe treasured spoils will recognize.'   He ceased: then Raghu's son repliedTo the glad tale, and eager cried:'Bring them with all thy speed: delayNo more, dear friend, but haste away.'

   Thus Ráma spoke. Sugríva hied
Within the mountain's caverned side.Impelled by love that stirred each thoughtThe precious tokens quickly brought,
And said to Raghu's son, Behold
This garment and these rings of gold,In Ráma's hand with friendly hasteThe jewels and the robe he placed.Then, like the moon by mist assailed,The tear-dimmed eyes of Ráma failed;That burst of woe unmanned his frame,Woe sprung from passion for his dame.And with his manly strength o'erthrown,He fell and cried, Ah me! mine own!Again, again close to his breastThe ornaments and robe he pressed.While the quick pants that shook his frameAs from a furious serpent came.On his dear brother standing nighHe turned at length his piteous eye;And, while his tears increasing ran,In bitter wail he thus began:'Look, brother, and behold once moreThe ornaments and robe she wore,Dropped while the giant bore awayIn cruel arras his struggling prey,Dropped in some quiet spot, I ween,Where the young grass was soft and green;

For still untouched by spot or stain
Their former beauty all retain.'   He spoke with many a tear and sigh,And thus his brother made reply:'The bracelets thou hast fondly shown,And earrings, are to me unknown,But by long service taught I greetThe anklets of her honoured feet.' 
1b
   Then to Sugríva Ráma, bestOf Raghu's sons, these words addressed:   'Say to what quarter of the skyThe cruel fiend was seen to fly.Bearing afar my captured wife,My darling dearer tban my life.Speak, Vánar King, that I may knowWhere dwells the cause of all my woe;The fiend for whose transgression allThe giants by this hand shall fall.He who the Maithil lady stoleAnd kindled fury in my soul,Has sought his fate in senseless prideAnd opened Death's dark portal wide.Then toll me, Vánar lord, I pray,   The dwelling of my foe.And he, beneath this hand, to-day   To Yama's halls shall go.'
p. 331

Footnotes
329:1b Báli the king de facto.
329:2b With the Indian, as with the ancient Greeks, the 
throbbing of the right eye in a man is an auspicious 
sign, the throbbing of the left eye is the opposite. In a woman the * of signs are reversed. 
On the alliance between Ráma and the monkeys see 
ADDITIONAL NOTES.
330:1 The Vedas stolen by the demons Madhu and 
Kait'abha. 
"The text has (Sanskrit text) which signifies literally 
"the lost vedic tradition." It seems that allusion is here made to the Vedas submerged in the depth of the sea, but promptly recovered by Vishn'u in one of his incarnation, as the brahmanic legend relates, with which the ordhodoxy of the Bráhmans intended perhaps to allude to the prompt restoration and uninterrupted continuity of the ancient vedic tradition." 
GORRESIO.

330:2 Like the wife of a Nága or Serpent- God carried 
off by an eagle. The enmity between the King of birds 
and the serpent is of very frequent occurrence. It seems to be a modification of the strife between the Vedic Indra and the Ahi, the serpent or drought-fiend; between Apollón, and the Python, Adam and the Serpent.
330:1b He means that he has never ventured to raise his 
eyes to her arms and face, though he has ever been her 
devoted servant.
Next: Canto VII.: Ráma Consoled.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VII.: RÁMA CONSOLED.
With longing love and woe oppressed
The Vánar chief he thus addressed:And lie, while sobs his utterance broke,Raised up his reverent hands and spoke:   'O Raghu's son, I cannot tellWhere now that cruel fiend may dwell,Declare his power and might, or traceThe author of his cursed race.Still trust the promise that I makeAnd let thy breast no longer ache.So will I toil, nor toil in vain,That thou thy consort mayst regain.So will I work with might and skillThat joy anew thy heart shall fill:The valour of my soul display,And Rávan and his legions slay.Awake, awake! unmanned no moreRecall the strength was thine of yore.Beseems not men like thee to wearA weak heart yielding to despair.Like troubles, too, mine eyes have seen,Lamenting for a long-lost queen;But, by despair unconquered yet,My strength of mind I ne'er forget.

Far more shouldst thou of lofty soul
Thy passion and thy tears control,When I, of Vánar's humbler strain,Weep not for her in ceaseless pain.Be firm, be patient, nor forgetThe bounds the brave of heart have setIn loss, in woe, in strife, in fear,When the dark hour of death is near.Up? with thine own brave heart advise:Not thus despond the firm and wise.But he who gives his childish heartTo choose the coward's weakling part,Sinks, like a foundered vessel, deepIn waves of woe that o'er him sweep.See, suppliant hand to hand I lay,And, moved by faithful love, I pray.Give way no more to grief and gloom,But all thy native strength resume.No joy on earth, I ween, have theyWho yield their souls to sorrow's sway.Their glory fades in slow decline:'Tis not for thee to grieve and pine.I do but hint with friendly speechThe wiser part I dare not teach.This better path, dear friend, pursue,And let not grief thy soul subdue.'   Sugríva thus with gentle artAnd sweet words soothed the mourner's heart,Who brushed off with his mantle's hem

Tears from the eyes bedewed with them.
Sugríva's words were not in vain,
And Ráma was himself again,Around the king his arms he threwAnd thus began his speech anew:   'Whate'er a friend most wise and true,Who counsels for the best, should do,Whate'er his gentle part should be,Has been performed, dear friend, by thee.Taught by thy counsel, O my lord,I feel my native strength restored.A friend like thee is hard to gain.Most rare in time of grief and pain.Now strain thine utmost power to traceThe Maithil lady's dwelling place,And aid me in my search to findFierce Rávan of the impious mind.Trust thou, in turn thy loyal friend,And say what aid this arm can lendTo speed thy hopes, as fostering rainQuickens in earth the scattered grain.Deem not those words, that seemed to springFrom pride, are false, O Vánar King.None from these lips has ever heard,None e'er shall hear, one lying word.Again I promise and declare,Yea, by my truth, dear friend, I swear.'   Then glad was King Sugríva's breast,

And all his lords their joy confessed,
Stirred by sure hope of Ráma's aid,And promise which the prince had made.
Next: Canto VIII.: Ráma's Promise.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VIII.: RÁMA'S PROMISE.
Doubt from Sugríva's heart had fled,
And thus to Raghu's son he said:'No bliss the Gods of heaven deny.Each views me with a favouring eye.When thou, whom all good gifts attend,Hast sought me and become my friend.Leagued, friend, with thee in bold empriseMy arm might win the conquered skies;And shall our banded strength be weakTo gain the realm which now I seek?A happy fate was mine aboveMy kith and kin and all I love.When, near the witness fire, I wonThy friendship, Raghu's glorious son.Thou too in ripening time shall seeThy friend not all unworthy thee.What gifts I have shall thus be shown:Not mine the tongue to make them known.Strong is the changeless bond that bindsThe friendly faith of noble minds.In woe, in danger, firm and sureTheir constancy and love endure.Gold, silver, jewels rich and rareThey count as wealth for friends to share.

p. 332
Yea, be they rich or poor and low,
Blest with all joys or sunk in woe,Stained with each fault or pure of blame,Their friends the nearest place may claim;For whom they leave, at friendship's call,Their gold, their bliss, their homes and all,   He spoke by generous impulse moved,And Raghu's son his speech approvedGlancing at Lakshman by his side,Like Indra in his beauty's pride.The Vánar monarch saw the pairOf mighty brothers standing there,And turned his rapid eye to viewThe forest trees that near him grew.He saw, not far from where he stood,A Sál tree towering o'er the wood.Amid the thick leaves many a beeGraced the scant blossoms of the tree,From whose dark shade a bough, that boreA load of leafy twigs, he tore,Which on the grassy ground he laidAnd seats for him and Ráma made,Hanúmán saw them sit, he soughtA Sál tree's leafy bough and broughtThe burthen, and with meek requestEntreated Lakshman, too, to rest.

There on the noble mountain's brow,
Strewn with the young leaves of the bough,Sat Raghu's son in placid easeCalm as the sea when sleeps the breeze.Sugríva's heart with rapture swelled,And thus, by eager love impelled,He spoke in gracious tone, that, oftChecked by his joy, was low and soft:'I, by my brother's might oppressed,By ceaseless woe and fear distressed,Mourning my consort far away,On Rishyamúka's mountain stray.Expelled by Báli's cruel hateI wander here disconsolate.Do thou to whom all sufferers flee,From his dread hand deliver me.'   He spoke, and Rama, just and brave,Whose pious soul to virtue clave,Smiled as in conscious might he eyedThe king of Vánars, and replied:'Best fruit of friendship is the deedThat helps the friend in hour of need;And this mine arm in death shall layThy robber ere the close of day.For see, these feathered darts of mineWhose points so fiercely flash and shine,And shafts with golden emblem, cameFrom dark woods known by Skanda's name, 
1

Winged from the pinion of the hern
Like Indra's bolts they strike and burn.With even knots and piercing headEach like a furious snake is sped;With these, to-day, before thine eyeShall, like a shattered mountain, lieBáli, thy dread and wicked foe,O'erwhelmed in hideous overthrow.'   He spoke: Sugríva's bosom swelledWith hope and joy unparalleled.Then his glad voice the Vánar raised,And thus the son of Raghu praised:'Long have I pined in depth of grief;Thou art the hope of all, O chief.Now, Raghu's son, I bail thee friend,And bid thee to my woes attend;For, by ray truth I swear it, nowNot life itself is dear as thou,Since by the witness fire we metAnd friendly hand in hand was set.Friend communes now with friend, and henceI tell with surest confidence,How woes that on my spirit weighConsume me through the night and day.'   For sobs and sighs he scarce could speak,And his sad voice came low and weak,As, while his eyes with tears o'erflowed,The burden of his soul he showed.Then by strong effort, bravely made,

The torrent of his tears he stayed,
Wiped his bright eyes, his grief subdued,And thus, more calm, his speech renewed:'By Báli's conquering might oppressed,Of power and kingship dispossessed,Loaded with taunts of scorn and hateI left my realm and royal state.He tore away my consort: sheWas dearer than my life to me,And many a friend to me and mineIn hopeless chains was doomed to pine.With wicked thoughts, unsated still,Me whom he wrongs he yearns to kill;And spies of Vánar race, who triedTo slay me, by this hand have died.Moved by this constant doubt and fearI saw thee, Prince, and came not near.When woe and peril gather rouudA foe in every form is found.Save Hanúmán, O Raghu's son,And these, no friend is left me, none.Through their kind aid, a faithful bandWho guard their lord from hostile hand,Rest when their chieftain rests and bendTheir steps where'er he lists to wend,--Through them alone, in toil and pain,My wretched life I still sustain.
p. 333

Enough, for thou hast heard in brief
The story of my pain and grief.His mighty strength all regions know,My brother, but my deadly foe.Ah, if the proud oppressor fell,His death would all my woe dispel.Yea, on my cruel conqueror's fallMy joy depends, my life, my all.This were the end and sure relief,O Ráma, of my tale of grief.Fair be his lot or dark with woe.No comfort like a friend I know.'   Then Rama spoke: 'O friend, relateWhence sprang fraternal strife and hate,That duly taught by thee, I mayEach foeman's strength and weakness weigh:And skilled in every chance restoreThe blissful state thou hadst before.For, when I think of all the scornAnd bitter woe thou long hast borne.My soul indignant swells with painLike waters flushed with furious rain.Then, ere I string this bended bow,Tell me the tale I long to know,Ere from the cord my arrow fly,And low in death thy foeman lie.'   He spoke: Sugríva joyed to hear,Nor less his lords were glad of cheer:And thus to Ráma mighty-souled

The cause that moved their strife he told;
Footnotes
332:1 The wood in which Skanda or Kártikeva was 
brought up: 
                 'The Warrior-God
Whose infant steps amid the thickets strayedWhere the reeds wave over the holy sod.
See also Book I. Canto XXIX. Meghadúta
Next: Canto IX.: Sugríva's Story. 

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IX.: SUGRÍVA'S STORY.  1
'My brother, known by Báli's name,
Had won by might a conqueror's fame.My father's eldest-born was he,Well honoured by his sire and me.My father died, and each sage lordNamed Báli king with one accord;And he, by right of birth ordained,The sovereign of the Vánars reigned.He in his royal place controlledThe kingdom of our sires of old,And I all faithful service lentTo aid my brother's government.The fiend Máváví, him of yoreTo Dundubhi  
2 his mother bore,--
For woman's love in strife engaged,A deadly war with Báli waged.When sleep had chained each weary frameTo vast Kishkindá's  
1b gates he came.
And, shouting through the shades of night,Challenged his foeman to the fight.My brother heard the furious shout,And wild with rage rushed madly out.

Though fain would I and each sad wife
Detain him from the deadly strife.He burned his demon foe to slay,And rushed impetuous to the fray.His weeping wives he thrust aside,And forth, impelled by fury, hied;While, by my love and duty led,I followed where my brother sped.Máyáví looked, and at the sightFled from his foes in wild affright.The flying fiend we quickly viewed.And with swift feet his steps pursued.Then rose the moon, whose friendly rayCast light upon our headlong way.By the soft beams was dimly shownA mighty cave with grass o'ergrown.Within its depths he sprang, and weThe demon's form no more might see.My brother's breast was all aglowWith fury when he missed the foe,And, turning, thus to me he saidWith senses all disquieted:'Here by the cavern's mouth remain;Keep ear and eye upon the strain,While I the dark recess exploreAnd dip my brand in foeman's gore.'I heard his angry speech, and triedTo turn him from his plan aside.He made me swear by both his feet,

And sped within the dark retreat.
While in the cave he stayed, and IWatched at the mouth, a year went by.For his return I looked in vain,And, moved by love, believed him slain.I mourned, by doubt and fear distressed,And greater horror seized my breastWhen from the cavern rolled a flood,A carnage stream of froth and blood;And from the depths a sound of fear,The roar of demons, smote mine ear;But never rang my brother's shoutTriumphant in the battle rout.I closed the cavern with a block,Huge as a hill, of shattered rock.Gave offerings due to Báli's shade,And sought Kishkindhá, sore dismayed.Long time with anxious care I triedFrom Báli's lords his fate to hide,But they, when once the tale was known,Placed me as king on Báli's throne.There for a while I justly reigned
p. 334
And all with equal care ordained,When joyous from the demon slainMy brother Báli came again.He found me ruling in his stead,

And, fired with rage, his eyes grew red.
He slew the lords who made me king,And spoke keen words to taunt and sting.The kingly rank and power I heldMy brother's rage with ease had quelled,But still, restrained by old respectFor claims of birth, the thought I checked.Thus having struck the demon downCame Báli to his royal town.With meek respect, with humble speech,His haughty heart I strove to reach.But all my arts were tried in vain,No gentle word his lips would deign.Though to the ground I bent and setHis feet upon my coronet:Still Bali in his rage and prideAll signs of grace and love denied.'
Footnotes
333:1 "Sugríva's story paints in vivid colours the 
manners, customs and ideas of the wild mountain tribes 
which inhabited Kishkindhya or the southern hills of the Deccan, of the people whom the poem calls monkeys, tribes altogether different in origin and civilization from the Indo-Sanskrit race." Gorresio. 

333:2 A fiend slain by Báli.
333:1b Báli's mountain city.
Next: Canto X.: Sugríva's Story.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO X.: SUGRÍVA'S STORY.
'I strove to soothe and lull to rest
The fury of his troubled breast:Well art thou come, dear lord,' I cried.'By whose strong arm thy foe has died.Forlorn I languished here, but nowMy saviour and defence art thou.Once more receive this regal shade  
1
Like the full moon in heaven displayed;And let the chouries*,  
2 thus restored,
Wave glorious o'er the rightful lord.I kept my watch, thy word obeyed,And by the cave a year I stayed.But when I saw that stream of bloodRush from the cavern in a flood,My sad heart broken with dismay.And every wandering sense astray,I barred the entrance with a stone,--A crag from some high mountain thrown--Turned from the spot I watched in vain.And to Kishkindhá came again.My deep distress and downcast mienBy citizen and lord were seen.They made me king against my will:

Forgive me if the deed was ill.
True as I ever was I seeMy honoured king once more in thee;I only ruled a while the stateWhen thou hadst left us desolate.
This town with people, lords, and lands,
Lay as a trust in guardian hands:And now, my gracious lord, acceptThe kingdom which thy servant kept.Forgive me, victor of the foe,Nor let thy wrath against me glow.See joining suppliant hands I pray,And at thy feet my head I lay.Believe my words: against my willThe royal seat they made me fill.Unkinged they saw the city, henceThey made me lord for her defence.'   But Báli, though I humbly sued,Reviled me in his furious mood:'Out on thee, wretch!' in wrath he criedWith many a bitter taunt besideHe summoned every lord, and allHis subjects gathered at his call.Then forth his burning anger broke,And thus amid his friends he spoke:'I need not tell, for well ye know,How fierce Máyáví, fiend and foe,Came to Kishkindhá's gate by night,

And dared me in his wrath to fight.
I heard each word the demon said:Forth from my royal hall I sped;And, foe in brother's guise concealed,Sugríva followed to the field.The mighty demon through the shadeBeheld me come with one to aid:Then shrinking from unequal fight.He turned his back in swiftest flight.From vengeful foes his life to saveHe sought the refuge of a cave.Then when I saw the fiend had fledWithin that cavern dark and dread,Thus to my brother cruel-eyed.Impatient in my wrath, I cried:'I seek no more my royal townTill I have struck the demon down.Here by the cavein's mouth remainUntil my hand the foe have slain.'Upon his faith my heart relied,And swift within the depths I hied.A year went by: in every spotI sought the fiend, but found him not.At length my foe I saw and slew.Whom long I feared when lost to view;And all his kinsmen by his sideBeneath my vengeful fury died.The monster, as he reeled and fell,Poured forth his blood with roar and yell;

And, filling all the cavern, dyed
The portal with the crimson tide.Upon my foeman slain at lastOne look, one pitying look, I cast.I sought again the light of day:The cave was closed and left no way.To the barred mouth I sadly came,And called aloud Sugríva's name.But all was still: no voice replied,
p. 335
And hope within my bosom died.With furious efforts, vain at first,Through bars of rock my way I burst.Then, free once more, the path that broughtMy feet in safety home I sought.'Twas thus Sugríva dared despiseThe claim of brothers' friendly ties.With crags of rock he barred me in,And for himself the realm would win.   Thus Báli spoke in words severe;And then, unmoved by ruth or fear,Left me a single robe and sentHis brother forth in banishment.He cast me out with scathe and scorn,And from my side my wife was torn,Now in great fear and ill at easeI roam this land with woods and seas,

Or dwell on Rishyamúka's hill,
And sorrow for my consort still.Thou hast the tale how first aroseThis bitter hate of brother foes.Such are the griefs neath which I pine,And all without a fault of mine.O swift to save in hour of fear,My prayer who dread this Báli, hearWith gracious love assistance deign,And mine oppressor's arm restrain.'   Then Raghu's son, the good and brave,With a gay laugh his answer gate:'These shafts of mine which ne'er can fail,Before whose sheen the sun grows pale,Winged by my fury, fleet and fierce,The wicked Báli's heart shall pierce.Yea, mark the words I speak, so longShall live that wretch who joys in wrong,Until these angered eyes have seenThe robber of thy darling queen.I, taught by equal suffering, knowWhat waves of grief above thee flow.This hand thy captive wife shall free,And give thy kingdom back to thee.'   Sugríva joyed as Ráma spoke,And valour in his breast awoke.His eye grew bright, his heart grew bold,And thus his wondrous tale he told:

Footnotes
334:1 The canopy or royal umbrella, one of the usual 
Indian regalia.
334:2 Whisks made of the hair of the Yak or Bos grunniers, also regal insignia.
Next: Canto XI.: Dundubhi.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XI.: DUNDUBHI.
'I doubt not, Prince, thy peerless might,
Armed with these shafts so keen and bright,Like all-destroying fires of fate,The worlds could burn and devastate.But lend thou first thy mind and earOf Báli's power and might to hear.How bold, how firm, in battle tried,Is Báli's heart; and then decide.From east to west, from south to northOn restless errand hunting forth,
From farthest sea to sea he flies
Before the sun has lit the skies.A mountain top he oft will seek.Tear from its root a towering peak.Hurl it aloft, as 'twere a ball,And catch it ere to earth it fall.And many a tree that long has stoodIn health and vigour in the wood,His single arm to earth will throw,The marvels of his might to show.Shaped like a bull, a monster boreThe name of Dundubhi of yore:He matched in size a mountain height,

A thousand elephants in might.
By pride of wondrous gifts impelled,And strength he deemed unparalleled,To Ocean, lord of stream and brook,Athirst for war, his way he took.He reached the king of rolling wavesWhose gems are piled in sunless caves,And threw his challenge to the sea;'Come forth, O King, and fight with me.'He spoke, and from his ocean bedThe righteous  
1 monarch heaved his head,
And gave, sedate, his calm replyTo him whom fate impelled to die:'Not mine, not mine the power,' he cried,'To cope with thee in battle tried;But listen to my voice, and seekThe worthier foe of whom I speak.The Lord of Hills, where hermits liveAnd love the home his forests give,Whose child is S'ankar's darling queen,  
2
The King of Snows is he I mean.Deep caves has he, and dark boughs shadeThe torrent and the wild cascade.From him expect the fierce delightWhich heroes feel in equal fight.'He deemed that fear checked ocean's king,And, like an arrow from the string,To the wild woods that clothe the sideOf Lord Himálaya's hills he hied.

Then Dundubhi, with hideous roar.
Huge fragments from the summit toreVast as Airávat,  
3 white with snow,
And hurled them to the plains below.Then like a white cloud soft, serene.The Lord of Mountains' form was seen.It sat upon a lofty crest.And thus the furious fiend addressed:'Beseems thee not, O virtue's friend,My mountain tops to rive and rend;
p. 336
For I, the hermit's calm retreat,For deeds of war am all unmeet,'   The demon's eye with rage grew red,And thus in furious tone he said:'If thou from fear or sloth declineTo match thy strength in war with mine,Where shall I find a champion, say,To meet me burning for the fray?'He spoke: Himálaya, skilled in loreOf eloquence, replied once more,And, angered in his righteous mind,Addressed the chief of demon kind:'The Vánar Báli, brave and wise,Son of the God who rules the sides, 
1
Sways, glorious in his high renown,Kishkindhá his imperial town.

Well may that valiant lord who knows
Each art of war his might opposeTo thine, in equal battle set,As Namuehi  
2 and Indra met.
Go, if thy soul desire the fray;To Báli's city speed away,And that uoconquered hero meetWhose fame is high for warlike feat.'He listened to the Lord of Snow,And, his proud heart with rage aglow,Sped swift away and lighted downBy vast Kishkindhá, Báli's town.With pointed horns to strike and goreThe semblance of a bull he bore,Huge as a cloud that downward bendsEre the full flood of rain descends.Impelled by pride and rage and hate,He thundered at Kishkindhá's gate;And with his bellowing, like the soundOf pealing drums, he shook the ground,He rent the earth and prostrate threwThe trees that near the portal grew.King Báli from the bowers withinIndignant heard the roar and din.Then, moonlike mid the stars, with allHis dames he hurried to the wall;And to the fiend this speech, expressedIn clear and measured words, addressed:'Know me for monarch. Báli styled,

Of Vánar tribes that roam the wild.
Say why dost thou this gate molest,And bellowing thus disturb our rest?I know thee, mighty fiend: bewareAnd guard thy life with wiser care.'He spoke: and thus the fiend returned,While red with rage his eyeballs burned:'What! speak when all thy dames are nighAnd hero-like thy foe defy?
Come, meet me in the fight this day,
And learn my strength by bold assay.Or shall I spare tbee, and relentUntil the coming night be spent?Take then the respite of a nightAnd yield thee to each soft delight.Then, monarch of the Vánar race.With loving arms thy friends embrace.Gifts on thy faithful lords bestow,Bid each and all farewell, and go.Show in the streets once more thy face,Instal thy son to fill thy place.Dally a while with each dear dame;And then my strength thy pride shall tameFor, should I smite thee drunk with wineEnamoured of those dames of thine,Beneath diseases bowed and bent,Or weak, unarmed, or negligent,My deed would merit hate and scorn

As his who slays the child unborn.'
Then Báli's soul with rage was tired,Queen Tárá and the dames retired;And slowly, with a laugh of pride,The king of Vánars thus replied:'Me, fiend, thou deemest drunk with wine:Unless thy fear the fight decline,Come, meet me in the fray, and testThe spirit of my valiant breast.'He spoke in wrath and high disdain;And, laying down his golden chain,Gift of his sire Mahendra, daredThe demon, for the fray prepared;Seized by the horns the monster, vastAs a huge hill, and held him fast,Then fiercely dragged him round and round,And, shouting, hurled him to the ground.Blood streaming from his ears, he rose,And wild with fury strove the foes.Then Báli, match for Indra's might,With every arm renewed the fight.He fought with fists, and feet, and knees,With fragments of the rock, and trees.At last the monster's strength, assailedBy S'akra's  
1b conquering offspring, failed.
Him Bali raised with mighty strain.And dashed upon the ground again;Where, bruised and shattered, in a tideOf rushing blood, the demon died.

King Báli saw the lifeless corse,
And bending, with tremendous forceRaised the huge bulk from where it lay,And hurled it full a league away.As through the air the body flew,Some blood-drops, caught by gales that blew,Welled from his shattered jaw and fellBy Saint Matanga's hermit cell:Matanga saw, illustrious sage,Those drops defile his hermitage,
p. 337
And, as he marvelled whence they came,Fierce anger filled his soul with flame:'Who is the villain, evil-souled,With childish thoughts unwise and bold,Who is the impious wretch,' he cried,'By whom my grove with blood is dyed?'
Thus spoke Matanga in his rage,
And hastened from the hermitage,When lo, before his wondering eyesLay the dead bull of mountain sizeHis hermit soul was nothing slowThe doer of the deed to know,And thus the Vánar in a burstOf wild tempestuous wrath he cursed:'Ne'er let that Vánar wander here,

For, if he come, his death is near.
Whose impious hand with blood has dyedThe holy place where I abide,Who threw this demon corse and madeA ruin of the pleasant shade.If e'er he plant his wicked feetWithin one league of my retreat;Yea, if the villain come so nighThat very hour he needs must die.And let the Vánar lords who dwellIn the dark woods that skirt my cellObey my words, and speeding henceFind them some meeter residence.Here if they dare to stay, on allThe terrors of my curse shall fall.They spoil the tender saplings, dearAs children which I cherish here,Mar root and branch and leaf and spray,And steal the ripening fruit away.One day I grant, no further hour,To-morrow shall my curse have power,And then each Vánar I may seeA stone through countless years shall be.'The Vánars heard the curse and hiedFrom sheltering wood and mountain side.King Báli marked their haste and dread,And to the flying leaders said:'Speak, Vánar chiefs, and tell me whyFrom Saint Matanga's grove ye fly

To gather round me: is it well
With all who in those woodlands dwell?'He spoke: the Vánar leaders toldKing Báli with his chain of goldWhat curse the saint had on them laid,Which drove them from their ancient shade.Then royal Báli sought the sage,With reverent hands to soothe his rage.The holy man his suppliant spurned,And to his cell in anger turned.That curse on Báli sorely pressed.And long his conscious soul distressed.Him still the curse and terror keepAfar from Rishyamúka's steep.He dares not to the grove draw nigh,Nay scarce will hither turn his eye.We know what terrors warm him hence,And roam these woods in confidence.Look, Prince, before thee white and dryThe demon's bones uncovered lie,Who, like a hill in bulk and length,Fell ruind for his pride of strength.See those high Sál trees seven in rowThat droop their mighty branches low,These at one grasp would Báli seize,And leafless shake the trembling trees.These tales I tell, O Prince, to showThe matchless power that arms the foe.How canst thou hope to slay him? how

Meet Báli in the battle now?'
Sugríva spoke and sadly sighed:
And Lakshman with a laugh replied:'What show of power, what proof and testMay still the doubts that fill thy breast?'
He spoke. Sugríva thus replied:
'See yonder Sál trees side by side.King Báli here would take his standGrasping his bow with vigorous hand,And every arrow, keen and true.Would strike its tree and pierce it throughIf Ráma now his bow will bend,And through one trunk an arrow send;Or if his arm can raise and throwTwo hundred measures of his bow,Grasped by a foot and hurled through air,The demon bull that moulders there,My heart will own his might and fainBelieve my foe already slain.'
Sugríva spoke inflamed with ire,
Scanned Ráma with a glance of fire,Pondered a while in silent mood.And thus again his speech renewed:'All lands with Báli's glories ring,A valiant, strong, and mighty king;In conscious power unused to yield;

A hero first in every field.
His wondrous deeds his might declare,Deeds Gods might scarcely do or dare;And on this power reflecting stillI roam on Rishyamúka's hill.Awed by my brother's might I rove,In doubt and fear, from grove to grove,While Hanumán, my chosen friend,And faithful lords my steps attend;And now, O true to friendship's tie,I hail in thee my best ally.My surest refuge from my foes,And steadfast as the Lord of Snows.Still, when I muse how strong and boldIs cruel Báli, evil-souled,But ne'er, O chief of Raghu's line,Have seen what strength in war is thine,Though in my heart I may not dareDoubt thy great might, despise, compare,Thoughts of his fearful deeds will riseAnd fill my soul with sad surmise.Speech, form, and trust which naught may move
p. 338
Thy secret strength and glory prove,As smouldering ashes dimly showThe dormant fires that live below.'   He ceased: and Ráma answered, while

Played o'er his lips a gracious smile:
'Not yet convinced? This clear assayShall drive each lingering doubt away.'Thus Ráma spoke his heart to cheer,To Dundubhi's vast frame drew near:He touched it with his foot in playAnd sent it twenty leagues away.Sugríva marked what easy forceHurled through the air that demon's corseWhose mighty bones were white and dried,And to the son of Raghu cried:'My brother Báli, when his mightWas drunk and weary from the fight,Hurled forth the monster body, freshWith skin and sinews, blood and flesh.Now flesh and blood are dried away.The crumbling bones are light as hay,Which thou, O Raghu's son, hast sentFlying through air in merriment.This test alone is weak to showIf thou be stronger or the foe.By thee a heap of mouldering bone,By him the recent corse was thrown.Thy strength, O Prince, is yet untried:Come, pierce one tree: let this decide.Prepare thy ponderous bow and bringClose to thine ear the straining string.On yonder Sál tree fix thine eye,And let the mighty arrow fly,

I doubt not, chief, that I shall see
Thy pointed shaft transfix the tree.Then come, assay the easy task,And do for love the thing I ask.   Best of all lights, the Day-God fills     With glory earth and sky:   Himálaya is the lord of hills     That heave their heads on high.   The royal lion is the best     Of beasts that tread the earth;   And thou, O hero, art confessed     First in heroic worth.'
Footnotes
335:1 Righteous because he never transgresses his 
bounds, and 
    "over his great tides
    Fidelity presides."
335:2 Himálaya, the Lord of Snow, is the father of Umá 
the wife of S'iva or S'ankar.
335:3 Indra's celestial elephant.

336:1 Báli was the son of Indra. See p.28.
336:2 An Asur slain by Indra. See p. 261 Note. He is, 
like Vritra, a form of the demon of drought destroyed 
by the beneficent God of the firmament.
336:1b Another name of Indra or Mahendra.
Next: Canto XII.: The Palm Trees.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XII.: THE PALM TREES.
Then Ráma, that his friend might know
His strength unrivalled, grasped his bow,That mighty bow the foe's dismay,--And on the string an arrow lay.Next on the tree his eye he bent,And forth the hurtling weapon went.Loosed from the matchless hero's hold,That arrow, decked with burning gold,Cleft the seven palms in line, and throughThe hill that rose behind them flew:
Six subterranean realms it passed,
And reached the lowest depth at last,Whence speeding back through earth and airIt sought the quiver, and rested there.  
1
Upon the cloven trees amazed.The sovereign of the Vánars gazed.With all his chains and gold outspreadProstrate on earth he laid his head.Then, rising, palm to palm he laidIn reverent act, obeisance made,And joyously to Ráma, bestOf war-trained chiefs, these words addressed:

   'What champion, Raghu's son, may hope
With thee in deadly fight to cope,Whose arrow, leaping from the bow.Cleaves tree and hill and earth below?Scarce might the Gods, arrayed for strifeBy Indra's self, escape, with lifeAssailed by thy victorious hand:And how may Báli hope to stand?All grief and care are past away,And joyous thoughts my bosom sway,Who have in thee a friend, renowned.As Varun  
2 or as Indra, found.
Then on! subdue,--'tis friendship's claim,--My foe who bears a brother's name.Strike Báli down beneath thy feet:With suppliant hands I thus entreat,'Sugríva ceased, and Ráma pressedThe grateful Vánar to his breast;And thoughts of kindred feeling wokeIn Lakshman's bosom, as he spoke:'On to Kishkindhá, on with speed!Thou, Vánar King, our way shalt lead,Then challenge Báli forth to fight.Thy foe who scorns a brother's right.'   They sought Kishkindhá's gate and stoodConcealed by trees in densest wood,Sugríva, to the fight addressed,More closely drew his cinctured vest,And raised a wild sky-piercing shout

p. 339
To call the foeman Báli out.
Forth came impetuous Báli, stirredTo fury by the shout he heard.So the great sun, ere night has ceased,Springs up impatient to the east.Then fierce and wild the conflict ragedAs hand to hand the foes engaged,As though in battle mid the starsFought Mercury and fiery Mars.  
1
To highest pitch of frenzy wroughtWith fists like thunderbolts they fought,While near them Ráma took his stand,And viewed the battle, bow in hand.Alike they stood in form and might,Like heavenly As'vins  
2 paired in fight,
Nor might the son of Raghu knowWhere fought the friend and where the foe;So, while his bow was ready bent.No life-destroying shaft he sent.Crushed down by Báli's mightier strokeSugríva's force now sank and broke,Who, hoping naught from Ráma's aid,To Rishyamúka fled dismayed,Weary, and faint, and wounded sore,His body bruised and dyed with gore,From Báli's blows, in rage and dread,

Afar to sheltering woods he fled.
   Nor Báli farther dared pursue,The curbing curse too well he knew.'Fled from thy death!' the victor cried,And home the mighty warrior hied.Hanúmán, Lakshman, Raghu's sonBeheld the conquered Vánar run.And followed to the sheltering shadeWhere yet Sugríva stood dismayed.Near and more near the chieftains came,Then, for intolerable shame,Not daring yet to lift his eyes,Sugríva spoke with burning sighs:'Thy matchless strength I first beheld,And dared my foe, by thee impelled.Why hast thou tried me with deceitAnd urged me to a sure defeat?
Thou shouldst have said, 'I will not slay
Thy foeman in the coming fray.'For had I then thy purpose knownI had not waged the fight alone.'   The Vánar sovereign, lofty-souled,In plaintive voice his sorrows told.Then Ráma spake: 'Sugríva, list,All anger from thy heart dismissed,And I will tell the cause that stayedMine arrow, and withheld the aid.In dress, adornment, port, and height,

In splendour, battle-shout, and might,
No shade of difference could I seeBetween thy foe, O King, and thee.So like was each, I stood at gaze,My senses lost in wildering maze,Nor loosened from my straining bowA deadly arrow at the foe,Lest in my doubt the shaft should sendTo sudden death our surest friend.O, if this hand in heedless guiltAnd rash resolve thy blood had spilt,Through every land, O Vánar King,My wild and foolish act would ring,Sore weight of sin on him must lieBy whom a friend is made to die;And Lakshman, I, and Sítá, bestOf dames, on thy protection rest.On, warrior! for the fight prepare;Nor fear again thy foe to dare.Within one hour thine eye shall viewMy arrow strike thy foeman through;Shall see the stricken Báli lieLow on the earth, and gasp and die.But come, a badge about thee bind,O monarch of the Vánar kind.That in the battle shock mine eyesThe friend and foe may recognize.Come, Lakshman, let that creeper deckWith brightest bloom Sugríva's neck,

And be a happy token, twined
Around the chief of lofty mind.'   Upon the mountain slope there grewA threading creeper fair to view,And Lakshman plucked the bloom and roundSugríva's neck a garland wound,Graced with the flowery wreath he wore,The Vánar chief the semblance boreOf a dark cloud at close of dayEngarlanded with cranes at play,In glorious light the Vánar glowedAs by his comrade's side he strode.And, still on Ráma's word intent,His steps to great Kishkindhá bent.
p. 340
Footnotes
338:1 The Bengal recension makes it return In the form 
of a swan.
338:2 Varuna is one of the oldest of the Vedic Gods, corresponding in name and partly in character to the 
ο•ραν•ς of the Greeks and is often regarded as the 
supreme deity. He upholds heaven and earth, possesses 

extraordinary power and wisdom, sends his messengers 
through both worlds, numbers the very winkings of men's eyes, punishes transgressors whom he seizes with his deadly noose, and pardons the sins of those who are penitent. In later mythology he has become the God of the sea.
339:1 Budha, not to be confounded with the great 
reformer Buddha, is the son of Soma or the Moon, and 
regent of the planet Mercury. Angára is the regent of Mars who is called the red or the fiery planet. The encounter between Michael and Satan is similarly said to have been as if 
   "Two planets rushing from aspect malign   Of fiercest opposition in midsky   Should combat, and their jarring spheres   compound."
Paradise Lost. Book VI.
339:2 The As'vins or Heavenly Twins, the Dioskuri or 
Castor and Pollux of the Hindus, have frequently been 
mentioned. See p. 36, Note
Next: Canto XIII.: The Return To Kishkindhá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIII.: THE RETURN TO 
KISHKINDHÁ.
Thus with Sugríva, from the side
Of Rishyamuka, Ráma hied,And stood before Kishkindhá's gateWhere Báli kept his regal state.The hero in his warrior holdRaised his great bow adorned with gold,And drew his pointed arrow brightAs sunbeams, finisher of fight.Strong-necked Sugríva led the wayWith Lakshman mighty in the fray.Nala and Níla came behindWith Hanumán of lofty mind.And valiant Tára, last in place,A leader of the Vánar race.They gazed on many a tree that showedThe glory of its pendent load,And brook and limpid rill that madeSweet murmurs as they seaward strayed.They looked on caverns dark and deep,On bower and glen and mountain steep,And saw the opening lotus studWith roseate cup the crystal flood,

While crane and swan and coot and drake
Made pleasant music on the lake,And from the reedy bank was heardThe note of many a happy bird.In open lawns, in tangled ways,They saw the tall deer stand at gaze,Or marked them free and fearless roam,Fed with sweet grass, their woodland home.At times two flashing tusks betweenThe wavings of the wood were seen,And some mad elephant, alone,Like a huge moving hill, was shown.And scarcely less in size appearedGreat monkeys all with dust besmeared.And various birds that roam the skies,And silvan creatures, met their eyes,As through the wood the chieftains sped,Anil followed where Sugríva led.   Then Ráma, as their way they made,Saw near at hand a lovely shade,And, as he gazed upon the trees,Spake to Sugríva words like these;'Those stately trees in beauty rise,Fair as a cloud in autumn skies,I fain, my friend, would learn from theeWhat pleasant grove is that I see.'   Thus Ráma spake, the mighty souled;And thus his tale Sugríva told:   'That, Ráma, is a wide retreat

That brings repose to weary feet.
Bright streams and fruit and roots are there,And shady gardens passing fair.There, neath the roof of hanging boughs,The sacred Seven maintained their vows.Their heads in dust were lowly laid,In streams their nightly beds were made.Each seventh night they broke their fast,But air was still their sole repast,And when seven hundred years were spentTo homes in heaven the hermits went.Their glory keeps the garden yet,With walls of stately trees beset.Scarce would the Gods and demons dare,By Indra led, to enter there.No beast that roams the wood is found,No bird of air, within the bound;Or, thither if they idly stray,They find no more their homeward way.You hear at times mid dulcet tonesThe chime of anklets, rings, and zones.You hear the song and music sound,And heavenly fragrance breathes around,There duly burn the triple fires 
1
Where mounts the smoke in curling spires,And, in a dun wreath, hangs aboveThe tall trees, like a brooding dove.Round brunch and crest the vapours closeTill every tree enveloped shows

A hill of lazulite when clouds
Hang round it with their misty shrouds.With Lakshman, lord of Raghu's line,In reverent guise thine head incline,And with fixt heart and suppliant handGive honour to the sainted band.They who with faithful hearts revereThe holy Seven who harboured here,Shall never, son of Raghu, knowIn all their lives an hour of woe.'   Then Ráma and his brother bent.And did obeisance reverentWith suppliant hand and lowly head,Then with Sugríva onward sped.Beyond the sainted Seven's abodeFar on their way the chieftains strode,And great Kishkindhá's portal gained,The royal town where Báli reigned.Then by the gate they took their standAll ready armed a noble band,   And burning every oneTo slay in battle, hand to hand,   Their foeman, Indra's son,
Next: Canto XIV.: The Challenge.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIV.: THE CHALLENGE.
They stood where trees of densest green
Wove round their forms a veiling screen.O'er all the garden's pleasant shadeThe eyes of King Sugríva strayed,
p. 341
And, as on grass and tree he gazed,The fires of wrath within him blazed.Then like a mighty cloud on high,When roars the tempest through the sky,Girt by his friends he thundered outHis dread sky-rending battle-shoutLike some proud lion in his gait,Or as the sun begins his state,Sugríva let his quick glance restOn Ráma whom he thus addressed:'There is the seat of Báli's sway.Where flags on wall and turret play,Which mighty bands of Vánars hold,Rich in all arms and store of gold.Thy promise to thy mind recallThat Báli by thy hand shall fall.As kindly fruits adorn the bough.

So give my hopes their harvest now.'
   In suppliant tone the Vánar prayed,And Raghu's son his answer made'By Lakshman''s hand this flowery twineWas wound about thee for a sign.The wreath of giant creeper throwsAbout thy form its brillant glows,As though about the sun were setThe bright stars for a coronet.One shaft of mine this day, dear friend,Thy sorrow and thy fear shall end.And, from the bowstring freed, shall beGiver of freedom, King, to thee.Then come, Sugríva, quickly show,Where'er he lie, thy bitter foe;And let my glance the wretch descryWhose deeds, a brother's name belie.Yea, soon in dust and blood o'erthrownShall Báli fall and gasp and groan.Once let this eye the foeman see,Then, if he live to turn and flee,Despise my puny strength and shameWith foul opprobrium Ráma's name.Hast thou not seen his hand, O King,Through seven tall trees one arrow wing?Stili in that strength securely trust,And deem thy foeman in the dust,In all my days, though surely triedBy grief and woe, I ne'er have lied;

And still by duty's law restrained
Will ne'er with falsehood's charge be stained.Cast doubt away: the oath I swareIts kindly fruit shall quickly bear,As smiles the land with golden grainBy mercy of the Lord of rain.Oh, warrior to the gate I defyThy foe with shout and battle-cry.Till Báli with his chain of goldCome speeding from his royal hold.Blood hearts, with warlike fire aglow,Brook not the challenge of a foe:Each on his power and might relies,And most before his fathers eyes.
King Báli loves the fray too well
To linger in his citadel,And, when he hears thy battle-shout,All wild for war will hasten out.'   He spoke. Sugríva raised a cryThat shook and rent the echoing sky,A shout so fierce and loud and dreadThat stately bulls in terror fled,Like dames who fly from threatened stainIn some ignoble monarch's reign.The deer in wild confusion ranLike horses turned in battle's van.Down fell the birds, like Gods who fallWhen merits fail, 
1, at that dread call.

So fiercely, boldened for the fray,
The offspring of the Lord of DaySent forth his furious shout as loudAs thunder from a labouring cloud,Or, where the gale blows fresh and free,The roaring of the troubled sea.
Footnotes
340:1 Called respectively Gárhapatra, Áhavaniya, and 
Dakshina, household, sacrificial, and southern.
Next: Canto XV.: Tará.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XV.: TARÁ.
That shout, which shook the land with fear,
In thunder smote on Báli's ear,Where in the chamber barred and closedThe sovereign with his dame reposed.Each amorous thought was rudely stilled,And pride and rage his bosom filled.His angry eyes flashed darkly red,And all his native brightness fled,As when, by swift eclipse assailed,The glory of the sun has failed.While in his fury uncontrolledHe ground his teeth, his eyeballs rolled,He seemed a lake wherein no gemOf blossom decks the lotus stem.He heard, and with indignant prideForth from the bower the Vánar hied.And the earth trembled at the beatAnd fury of hit hastening feet.But Tára to her consort flew,Her loving arms around him threw.And trembling and bewildered, gaveWise counsel that might heal and save:'O dear my lord, this rage controlThat like a torrent floods thy soul,

And cant these idle thoughts away
Like faded wreath of yesterday,O tarry till the morning light,Then, if thou wilt, go forth and fight.
p. 342
Think not I doubt thy valour, no;Or deem thee weaker than thy foe,Yet for a while would have thee stayNor see thee tempt the fight to-day.Now list, my loving lord, and learnThe reason why I bid thee turn.Thy foeman came in wrath and pride,And thee to deadly fight defied,Thou wentest out: he fought, and fledSore wounded and discomfited.But yet, untaught by late defeat,He comes his conquering foe to meet.And calls thee forth with cry and shout:Hence spring, my lord, this fear and doubt.A heart so bold that will not yield,But yearns to tempt the desperate field,Such loud defiance, fiercely pressed,On no uncertain hope can rest.So lately by thine arm o'erthrown,He comes not back, I ween, alone.Some mightier comrade guards his side,And spurs him to this burst of pride.

For nature made the Vánar wise:
On arms of might his hope relies;And never will Sugríva seekA friend whose power to save is weak.Now listen while my lips unfoldThe wondrous tale my Angad told.Our child the distant forest sought,Aud, learnt from spies, the tidings brought.Two sons of Das'arathu, sprungFrom old Ikshváku, brave and young,Renowned in arms, in war untamed--Ráma and Lakshman are they named--Have with thy foe Sugríva madeA league of love and friendly aid.Now Ráma, famed for exploit high,Is bound thy brother's firm ally,Like fires of doom  
1 that ruin all
He makes each foe before him fall.He is the suppliant's sure defence,The tree that shelters innocence.The poor and wretched seek his feet:In him the noblest glories meet.With skill and knowledge vast and deepHis sire's commands he loved to keep;With princely gifts and graces storedAs metals deck the Mountains' Lord. 
2
Thou canst not, O my hero, standBefore the might of Ráma's hand;For none may match his powers or dare

With him in deeds of war compare.
Hear, I entreat, the words I say,Nor lightly turn my rede away.O let fraternal discord cease,And link you in the bonds of peace.Let consecrating rites ordain
Sugríva partner of thy reign.
Let war and thoughts of conflict end,And be thou his and Ráma's friend,Each soft approach of love begin.And to thy soul thy brother win;for whether here or there he be,Thy brother still, dear lord, is he.Though far and wide these eyes I strainA friend like him I seek in vain.Let gentle words his heart incline,And gifts and honours make him thine,Till, foes no more, in love allied,You stand as brothers side by side.Thou in high rank wast wont to holdSugríva, formed in massive mould;Then come, thy brother's love regain,For other aids are weak and vain.If thou would please my soul, and stillPreserve me from all fear and ill,I pray thee by thy love be wiseAnd do the thing which I advise.Assuage thy fruitless wrath, and shun

The mightier arms of Raghu's son;
For Indra's peer in might is he,A foe too strong, my lord, for thee.'
Footnotes
341:1 The store of merit accumulated by a holy or 
austere life secures only a temporary seat in the 
mansion of bliss. When the lapse of time this store is exhausted, return to earth is unavoidable.
342:1 The conflagration which destroys the world at the 
end of a Yuga or age
342:2 Himalaya.
Next: Canto XVI.: The Fall of Báli.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVI.: THE FALL OF BÁLI.
Thus Tárá with the starry eyes  1b
Her counsel gave with burning sighs.
But Báli, by her prayers unmoved,Spurned her advice, and thus reproved:'How may this insult, scathe, aud scornBy me, dear love, be tamely born?My brother, yea my foe, comes nighAud dares me forth with shout and cry.Learn, trembler! that the valiant, theyWho yield no step in battle fray,Will die a thousand deaths but ne'erAn unavenged dishonour bear.Nor, O my love, be thou dismayedThough Ráma lend Sugríva aid,For one so pure and duteous, oneWho loves the right, all sin will shun,Release me from thy soft embrace,And with thy dames thy steps retrace:Enough already, O mine own,Of love and sweet devotion shown.Drive all thy fear and doubt away;I seek Sugríva in the frayHis boisterous rage and pride to still,And tame the foe I would not kill.

My fury, armed with brandished trees,
Shall strike Sugríva to his knees:
p. 343
Nor shall the humbled foe withstandThe blows of my avenging hand,When, nerved by rage and pride, I beatThe traitor down beneath my feet.Thou, love, hast lent thine own sweet aid,And all thy tender care displayed;Now by my life, by these who yearnTo serve thee well, I pray thee turn.But for a while, dear dame, I goTo come triumphant o'er the foe.'   Thus Báh spake in gentlest tone:Soft arms about his neck were thrown;Then round her lord the lady wentWith sad steps slow and reverent.She stood in solemn guise to blessWith prayers for safety and success,Then with her train her chamber soughtBy grief and racking fear distraught.   With serpent's pantings fierce and fastKing Báli from the city passed.His glance, as each quick breath he drew,Around to find the foe he threw,And saw where fierce Sugríva showedHis form with golden hues that glowed,

And, as a fire resplendent, stayed
To meet his foe in arms arrayed.When Báli, long-armed chieftain, foundSugríva stationed on the ground,Impelled by warlike rage he bracedHis warrior garb about his waist,And with his mighty arm raised highRushed at Sugríva with a cry.But when Sugríva, fierce and bold,Saw Báli with his chain of gold.His arm he heaved, his hand he closed,And face to face his foe opposed.To him whose eyes with fury shone,In charge imtpetuous rushing on,Skilled in each warlike art and plan,Báli with hasty words began:'My ponderous hood, to fight addressed.With fingers clenched and arm compressed.Shall on thy death doomed brow descendAnd, crashing down, thy life shall end.'He spoke; and wild with rage and pride,The fierce Sagríva thus replied:'Thus let my arm begin the strifeAnd from thy body crush the life.'   Then Báli, wounded aud enraged,With furious blows the battle waged.Sugríva seemed, with blood-streams dyed,A hill with fountains in his side.But with his native force unspent

A Sál tree from the earth he rent,
And like the bolt of Indra smoteOn Báli's head and chest and throat.Bruised by the blows he could not shield,Half vanquished Báli sank and reeled,As sinks a vessel with her freightBorne down by overwhelming weight.
Swift as Suparna's  
1 swiftest flight
In awful strength they rushed to fight:
So might the sun and moon on highEncountering battle in the sky.Fierce and more fierce, as fought the foes,The furious rage of combat rose.They warred with feet and arms and knees,With nails and stones and boughs and trees,And blows descending fast as rainDyed each dark form with crimson stain,While like two thunder-clouds they metWith battle-cry and shout and threat.Then Ráma saw Sugríva quail,Marked his worn strength grow weak and fail.Saw how he turned his wistful eyeTo every quarter of the sky.His friend's defeat he could not brook.Bent on his shaft an eager look,Then burned to slay the conquering foe,And laid his arrow on the bow.As to an orb the bow he drew

Forth from the string the arrow flew
Like Fate's tremendous discus hurledBy Yama  
2 forth to end the world.
So loud the din that every birdThe bow-string's clans with terror heard,And wildly fled the affrighted deerAs though the day of doom were near,So, deadly as the serpent's fang,Forth from the string the arrow sprang.Like the red lightning's flash and flameIt flew unerring to its aim,And, hissing murder through the air,Pierced Báli's breast, and quivered there.Struck by the shaft that flew so wellThe mighty Vánar reeled and fell,As earthward Indra's flag they pullWhen As'víní's fair moon is full  
3
Footnotes
342:1b Tárá means 'star'. The poet plays upon the name 
by comparing her beauty to that of the Lord of stars, the 
Moon.
Next: Canto XVII.: Báli's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVII.: BÁLI'S SPEECH.
Like some proud tree before the blast
Brave Báli to the ground was cast,Where prostrate in the dust he rolledClad in the sheen of glistening gold,
p. 344
As when uptorn the standard liesOf the great God who rules the skies.When low upon the earth was laidThe lord whom Vánar tribes obeyed,Dark as a moonless sky no moreHis land her joyous aspect wore.Though low in dust and mire was rolledThe form of Báli lofty-souled,Still life and valour, might and graceClung to their well-loved dwelling-place.That golden chain with rich gems set,The choicest gift of Sákra,  
1 yet
Preserved his life nor let decaySteal strength and beauty's light away.Still from that chain divinely wroughtHis dusky form a glory caught,As a dark cloud, when day is done,

Made splendid by the dying sun.
As fell the hero, crushed in fight,There beamed afar a triple lightFrom limbs, from chain, from shaft that drankHis life-blood as the warrior sank.The never-failing shaft, impelledBy the great bow which Ráma held,Brought bliss supreme, and lit the wayTo Brahmá's worlds which ne'er decay.  
2
   Ráma and Lakshman nearer drewThe mighty fallen foe to view,Mahendra's son, the brave and bold,The monarch with his chain of gold,With lustrous face and tawny eyes,Broad chest, and arms of wondrous size,Like Lord Mahendra fierce in fight,Or Vishnu's never-conquered might,Now fallen like Yayáil  
3 sent
From heaven, his store of merit spent.Like the bright flame that pales and dies,Like the great sun who fires the skies,Doomed in the general doom to fallWhen time shall end and ruin all.   The wounded Báli, when he sawRáma and Lakshman nearer draw.Keen words to Raghu's son, impressedWith justice' holy stamp, addressed:   'What fame, from one thou hast not slain

In front of battle, canst thou gain,
Whose secret hand has laid me lowWhen madly fighting with my foe?From every tongue thy glory rings,A scion of a line of kings,True to thy vows, of noblest race,With every gentle gift and grace:Whose tender heart for woe can feel,And joy in every creature's weal:Whose breast with high ambition swell--Knows duty's claim and ne'er rebels.They praise thy valour, patience, ruth,Thy firmness, self-restrain, and truthThy hand prepared for sin's control.All virtues of a princely soul.I thought of all these gifts of thine,And glories of an ancient line,I set my Tárá's tears at naught,I met Sugríva and we fought.O Ráma, till this fatal mornI held that thou wouldst surely scornTo strike me as I fought my foeAnd thought not of a stranger's blow,But now thine evil heart is shown,A yawning well with grass o'ergrown.Thou wearest virtue's badge, 
1b but guile
And meanest sin thy soul defile.I took thee not for treacherous fire,A sinner clad in saint's attire;

Nor deemed thou idly wouldst profess
The show and garb of righteousness.In fenced town, in open land,Ne'er hast thou suffered at this hand,Nor canst of proud contempt complain:Then wherefore is the guiltless slain!My harmless life in woods I lead,On forest fruits and roots I feed.My foeman in the field I sought,And ne'er with thee, O Ráma, fought.Upon thy limbs, O King, I seeThe raiment of a devotee;And how can one like thee, who springsFrom a proud line of ancient kings.Beneath fair virtue's mask, disgraceHis lineage by a deed so base?From Raghu is thy long descent,For duteous deeds prëeminent:Why, sinner clad in saintly dress,Roamest thou through the wilderness?Truth, valour, justice free from spot,The hand that gives and grudges not,The might that strikes the sinner down,These bring a prince his best renown.Here in the woods, O King, we liveOn roots and fruit which branches give. 
2b
p. 345

Thus nature framed our harmless race:
Thou art a man supreme in place.Silver and gold and land provokeThe fierce attack, the robber's stroke.Canst thou desire this wild retreat,The berries and the fruit we eat?'Tis not for mighty kings to treadThe flowery path, by pleasure led.Theirs be the arm that crushes sin,Theirs the soft grace to woo and win:The steadfast will that guides the state,Wise favour to the good and great;And for all time are kings renownedWho blend these arts and ne'er confound,But thou art weak and swift to ire,Unstable, slave of each desire.Thou tramplest duty in the dust,And in thy bow is all thy trust.Thou carest naught for noble gain,And treatest virtue with disdain,While every sense its captive drawsTo follow pleasure's changing laws,I wronged thee not in word or deed,But by thy deadly dart I bleed.What wilt thou, mid the virtuous, sayTo purge thy lasting stain away?All these, O King, must sink to hell,The regicide, the infidel,He who in blood and slaughter joys,

A Bráhman or a cow destroys,
Untimely weds in law's despiteScorning an elder brother's right, 
1
Who dares his Teacher's bed ascend,The miser, spy, and treacherous friend.These impious wretches, one and all,Must to the hell of sinners fallMy skin the holy may not wear,Useless to thee my bones and hair;Nor may my slaughtered body beThe food of devotees like thee.These five-toed things a man may slayAnd feed upon the fallen prey;The mailed rhinoceros may die,And, with the hare his food supply.Iguanas he may kill and eat,
With porcupine and tortoise meat. 
1b
But all the wise account it sin
To touch my bones and hair and skin.My flesh they may not eat; and IA useless prey, O Ráma, die.In vain my Tárá reasoned well,On dull deaf ears her counsel fell.I scorned her words though sooth and sweet,And hither rushed my fate to meet,Ah for the land thou rulest! sheFinds no protection, lord, from thee,Neglected like some noble dame

By a vile husband dead to shame.
Mean-hearted coward, false and vile.Whose cruel soul delights in guile,Could Das'aratha, noblest king,Beget so mean and base a thing?Alas! an elephant, in formOf Ráma, in a maddening stormOf passion casting to the groundThe girth of law 
2b that clipped him round,
Too wildly passionate to feelThe prick of duty's guiding steel, 
3b
Has charged me unawares, and deadI fall beneath his murderous treadHow, stained with this my base defeat.How wilt thou dare, where good men meet,To speak, when every tongue will blameWith keen reproach this deed of shame?Such hero strength and valour, shownUpon the innocent alone,Thou hast not proved in manly strifeOn him who robbed thee of thy wife.Hadst thou but fought in open fieldAnd met me boldly unconcealed,This day had been thy fate to fall,Slain by this hand, to Yama's hall.In vain I strove, and struck by theeFell by a hand I could not see.Thus bites a snake, for sins of yore,A sleeping man who wakes no more.

Sugríva's foeman thou hast killed,
And thus his heart's desire fulfilledBut, Ráma, hadst thou sought me first,And told the hope thy soul has nursed,That very day had I restoredTbe Maithil lady to her lord;And, binding Rávan with a chain,Had laid him at thy feet unslain.
p. 346
Yea, were she sunk in deepest hell,Or whelmed beneath the ocean's swell,I would have followed on her trackAnd brought the rescued lady back,As Hayagríva 
1 once set free
From hell the white As'vatarí. 2
That when my spirit wings its flightSugríva reign, is just and right.But most unjust, O King, that I,Slain by thy treacherous hand, should lie,Be still, my heart: this earthly stateIs darkly ruled by sovereign Fate.The realm is lost and won: defyThy questioners with apt reply.' 
3
Footnotes

343:1 Suparna, the Well-winged, is another name of 
Garuda the King of Birds. See p. 28, Note.
343:2 The God of Death.
343:3 The flag-staff erected in honour of the God Indra is lowered when the festival is over. As'víní in 
astronomy is the head of Aries or the first of the tweuty-eight lunar mmansions or asterisms.
344:1 Indra the father of Báli.
344:2 It is believed that every creature killed by Ráma 
obtained in consequence immediate beatitude.    'And 
blessed the hand that gave so dear a death.'
344:3 "Yayáti was invited to heaven by Indra, and 
conveyed on the way thither by Mátali, Indra's 
charioteer. He afterwards returned to earth where, by his virtuous administration he rendered all his subjects exempt from passion and decay.' HARRETTS C. D. OF INDIA
344:1b The ascetic's dress which he wore during his 
exile.

344:2b There is much inconsistency in the passages of 
the poem in which the Vánara are spoken of, which 
seems to point to two p. 345: widely different legends. 
The Vánars are generally represented as semi-divine beings with preternatural powers, living in houses and eating and drinking like men sometimes as here, as monkeys pure and simple, living is woods and eating fruit and roots.
345:1 For a younger brother to marry before the elder is 
a gross violation of Indian law and duty. The same law 
applied to daughters with the Hebrews: "It must not be so done in our country to give the younger before the first-born." GENESIS xix. 26.
345:1b "The hedgehog and porcupine, the lizard, the 
rhinoceros, the tortoise, and the rabbit or hare, wise 
legislators *delure* lawful food among five-toed animals." *MANU, i.* 18.
345:2b "He can not buckle his distempered cause 
Within the belt of rule." MACBETH.
345:3b The Ankus' or iron hook with which an elephant is driven and guided.
Next: Canto XVIII.: Ráma's Reply.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVIII.: RÁMA'S REPLY.
He ceased: and Ráma's heart was stirred
At every keen reproach he heard.There Báli lay, a dim dark sun,His course of light and glory run;Or like the bed of Ocean driedOf his broad floods from side to side,Or helpless, as the dying fire,Hushed his last words of righteous ire.Then Ráma, with his spirit moved,The Vánar king in turn reproved:'Why dost thou Báli, thus revile,And castest not a glance the whileOn claims of duty, love, and gain,And customs o'er the world that reign?Why dost thou blame me, rash and blind,Fickle as all thy Vánar kind.Slighting each rule of ancient daysWhich all the good and prudent praise?This land, each hill and woody chase,Belongs to old Ikshváku's race:
With bird and beast and man, the whole
Is ours to cherish and control.Now Bharat, prompt at duty's call,

Wise, just, and true, is lord of all.
Each claim of law, love, gain he knows,And wrath and favour duly shows.A king from truth who never bends,And grace with vigour wisely blends;With valour worthy of his race,He knows the claims of time and place,Now we and other kings of might,By his ensample taught aright,The lands of every region treadThat justice may increase and spread.While royal Bharat, wise and just,Rules the broad earth, his glorious trust,Who shall attempt, while he is lord,A deed by Justice held abhorred?We now, as Bharat has decreed,Let justice guide our every deed,And toil each sinner to repressWho scorns the way of righteousness.Thou from that path hast turned aside,And virtue's holy law defied.Left the fair path which kings should tread,And followed pleasure's voice instead.The man who cleaves to duty's lawRegards these three with filial awe--The sire, the elder brother, thirdHim from whose lips his lore he heard.Thus too, for duty's sake, the wiseRegard with fond paternal eyes

The well-loved younger brother, one
Their lore has ripened, and a son.Fine are the laws which guide the good,Abstruse, and hardly understood;Only the soul, enthroned withinThe breast of each, knows right from sinBut thou art wild and weak of soul,And spurnest, like thy race, control;The true and right thou canst not find.Tht blind consulting with the blind.Incline thine ear and I will teachThe cause that prompts my present speechThis tempest of thy soul assuageNor blame me in thine idle rage.On this great sin thy thoughts bestow,The sin for which I lay thee low.Thou, Báli, in thy brother's lifeHast robbed him of his wedded wife,And keepest, scorning ancient right,His Rumá for thine own delight.Thy son's own wife should scarcely beMore sacred in thine eyes than she.All duty thou hast scorned, and henceComes punishment for dire offence.For those who blindly do amissThere is, I ween, no way but this:To check the rash who dare to strayFrom custom which the good obey,I may not, sprung of Kshatriya line,

p. 347
Forgive this heinous sin of thine:
The laws for those who sin like theeThe penalty of death decree.Now Bharat rules with sovereign sway,And we his royal word obey.Tnere was no hope of pardon, none,For the vile deed that thou hast done,That wisest monarch dooms to dieThe wretch whose crimes the law defy;And we, chastising those who err,His righteous doom administer.Mv soul accounts Sugríva dearE'en as my brother Lakshman here.He brings me blessing, and I sworehis wife and kingdom to restore:A bond in solemn honour boundWhen Vánar chieftains stood around.And can a king like me forsakeHis friend, and plighted promise break?Reflect, O Vánar, on the cause,The sanction of eternal laws,And, justly smitten down, confessThou diest for thy wickediness,By honour was I bound to lendAssistance to a faithful friend;And thou hast met a righteous fateThy former sins to expiate.

And thus wilt thou some merit win
And make atonement for thy sin.For hear me, Vánar King, rehearseWhat Manu 
1 spake in ancient verse,--
This holy law, which all acceptWho honour duty, have I kept:'Pure grow the sinners kings chastise,And, like.the virtuous, gain the skies;By pain or full atonement freed,They reap the fruit of righteous deed,While kings who punish not incurThe penalties of those who err.'Mándhátá 
2 once, a noble king,
Light of the line from which I spring,Punished with death a devoteeWhen he had stooped to sin like thee;And many a king in ancient timeHas punished frantic sinners' crime,And, when their impious blood was spilt,Has washed away the stain of guilt.Cease, Báli, cease; no more complain:Reproaches and laments are vain.For thou art justly punished: weObey our king and are not free.Once more, O Báli, lend thine ear
Another weightiest plea to hear.
For this, when heard and pondered well.Will all complaint and rage dispel.

My soul will ne'er this deed repent,
Nor was my shaft in anger sent.We take the silvan tribes besetWith snare and trap and gin and net,And many a heedless deer we smiteFrom thickest shade, concealed from sight.Wild for the slaughter of the game,At stately stags our shafts we aim.We strike them bounding scared away,We strike them as they stand at bay,When careless in the shade they lie,Or scan the plain with watchful eye.They turn away their heads; we aim,And none the eager hunter blame.Each royal saint, well trained in lawOf duty, loves his bow to drawAnd strike the quarry, e'en as thouHast fallen by mine arrow now,Fiphting with him or unaware,--A Vánar thou.--I little care. 
1b
But yet, O best of Vánars, knowThat kings who rule the earth bestowFruit of pure life and virtuous deed.And lofty duty's hard-won meed.Harm not thy lord the king: abstainFrom ant and word that cause him pain;For kings are children of the skiesWho walk this earth in men's disguise.But thou, in duty's claims untaught,

thy breast with blinding passion fraught,
Assailest me who still have clungTo duty, with thy bitter tongue.'   He ceased; and Ball sore distressedThe sovereign claims of law confessed,And freed, o'erwhelmed with woe and shame,The lord of Raghu's race from blame.Then, reverent palm to palm applied,To Ráma thus the Vánar cried:'True, best of men, is every wordThat from thy lips these ears have heard,It ill beseems a wretch like meTo bandy empty words with thee.Forgive the angry taunts that brokeFrom my wild bosom as I spoke.And lay not to my charge, O King,
p. 348
My mad reproaches' idle sting.Thou, in the truth by trial trained,Best knowledge of the right hast gained:And layest, just and pure within,The meetest penalty on sin.Through every bond of law I burst,The boldest sinner and the worst.O let thy right-instructing speechConsole my heart and wisely teach.'   Like some sad elephant who stands

Fast sinking in the treacherous sands,
Thus Báli raised despairing eyes;Then spake again with sobs and sighs:   'Not for myself, O King, I grieve,For Tárá or the friends I leave,As for sweet Angad, my dear son,My noble, only little one.For, nursed in luxury and bliss,His father he will mourn and miss,And like a stream whose fount is dryWill waste away and sink and die,--My own dear child, my only boy,His mother Tárá's hope and joy.Spare him, O son of Raghu, spareThe child entrusted to thy care.My Angad and Sugríva treatE'en as thy heart considers meet,For thou, O chief of men, art strongTo guard the right and punish wrong.O, if thou wilt thine ear inclineTo hear these dying words of mine,He and Sugríva will to theeAs Bharat and as Lakshman be.Let not my Tárá, left forlorn,Weep for Sugríva's wrathful scorn;Nor let him, for her lord's offence,Condemn her faithful innocence.And well and wisely may he reignIf thy dear grace his power sustain:

If, following thee his friend and guide,
He turn not from thy hest aside:Thus may he reign with glory, nayThus to the skies will win his way.Though stayed by Tárá's fond recall,By thy dear hand I longed to fall.Against my brother rushed and fought,And gained the death I long have sought.'   Then Ráma thus the prince consoledFrom whose clear eyes the mists were rolled:'Grieve not for those thou leavest thus,Nor tremble for thyself or us,For we will deal with thine and theeAs duty and the laws decree.He who exacts and he who pays,Is justly slain or justly slays,Shall in the life to come have bliss;For each has done his task in this.Thou, wandering from the right, art madePure by the forfeit thou hast paid.Thy weight of sins is cast aside,And duty's claim is satisfied.Then grieve no more, O Prince, but clearThy bosom from all doubt and fear,For fate, inexorably stern,Thou hast no power to move or turn.Thy princely Angad still will shareMy tender love. Sugríva's care;And to thy offspring shall be shown

Affection that shall match thine own.'
Footnotes
346:1 Hayagríva, Horse-necked, is a form of Vishnu
346:2 "As'vatara is the name of a chief of the Nágas or 
serpents which inhabit the regions under the earth; it is 
also the name of a Gandharva. As'vatarí ought to be the wife of one of the two, but I am not sure that this conjecture is right. The commentator does not say who this As'vatarí is, or what tradition or myth, is alluded to. Vimalabodha reads As'vatarí in the nominative case, and explains, As'vatarí is the sun, and as the sun with his rays brings back the moon which has been sunk in the ocean and the infernal regions, so will I bring back Sítá." GORRESIO.
346:3 That is, 'Consider what answer you can give to 
your accusers when they charge you with injustice in 
killing me.'
347:1 Manu, Book VIII. 318. "But men who have 
committed offences and have received from kings the 
punishment due to them, go pure to heaven and become as clear as those who have done well."

347:2 Mándhátá was one of the earlier descendants of 
Ikshváku. His name is mentioned in Ráma's genealogy, 
p. 81.
347:1b I cannot understand how Válmíki could put such 
an excuse as this into Ráma's mouth. Ráma with all 
solemn ceremony, has made a league of alliance with Báli's younger brother whom he regards as a dear friend and almost as an equal, and now he winds up his reasons for killing Báli by coolly saying: 'Besides you are only a monkey, you know, after all, and as such I have every right to kill you how, when, and where I like.'
Next: Canto XIX.: Tárá's Grief.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIX.: TÁRÁ'S GRIEF.
No answer gave the Vánar king
To Ráma's prudent counselling.Battered and bruised by tree and stone,By Ráma's arrow overthrown,Fainting upon the ground he lay,Gasping his troubled life away.   But Tárá in the Vánar's hallHeard tidings of her husband's fall;Heard that a shaft from Ráma's bowHad laid the royal Báli low.Her darling Angad by her side,Distracted from her home she hied.Then nigh the place of battle drewThe Vánars, Angad's retinue.They saw the bow-armed Ráma: dreadFell on them, and they turned and fled.Like helpless deer, their leaders slain,So wildly fled the startled train.But Tárá saw, and nearer pressed.And thus the flying band addressed:'O Vánars, ye who ever standAbout our king, a trusty band,Where is the lion master? whyForsake ye thus your lord and fly?

Say, lies he dead upon the plain,
A brother by a brother slain,Or pierced by shafts from Ráma's bowThat rain from far upon the foe?'   Thus Tárá questioned, and was still:Then, wearers of each shape at will,The Vánars thus with one accordAnswered the Lady of their lord:'Turn, Tárá turn, and half undoneSave Angad thy beloved son.Tnere Ráma stands in death's disguise,And conquered Báli faints and dies.He by whose strong arm, thick and fast,Uprooted trees and rocks were cast,Lies smitten by a shaft that cameResistless as the lightning flame.When he, whose splendour once could vieWith Indra's, regent of the sky,Fell by that deadly arrow, allThe Vánars fled who marked his fall.Let all our chiefs their succours bring,And Angad be anointed king:
p. 349
For all who come of Vánar raceWill serve him set in Báli's place.Or else our conquering foes to-dayWithin our wall will force their way,

Polluting with their hostile feet
The chambers of thy loved retreat.Great fear is on us. all and one.Those who have wives and who have none,They lust for power, are fierce and bold,Or hate us for the strife of old.'
She heard their speech as, sore afraid,
Arrested in their flight, they stayed,And gave her answer as becameTne spirit of so true a dame:'Nay, what have I to do with pelf,With son, with kingdom, or with self,When he, my noble lord, who leadsThe Vánars 'like a loin, bleeds?His high-souled victor will I meet,And throw me prostrate at his feet.'She hastened forth, her bosom rentWith anguish, weeping as she went,And striking, mastered by her woes,Her head and breast with frantic blows.She hurried to the field and foundHer husband postrate on the ground,Who quelled the hostile Vánars' might,Whose bank was never turned in flight:Whose arm a massy rock could throwAs Indra hurls his bolts below:Fierce as the rushing tempest, loudAs thunder from a labouring cloud:

Whene'er he roared his voice of fear
Struck terror on the boldest ear:Now slain, as, hungry for the prey,A tiger might a lion slay:Or when, his serpent foe to seek,Suparna 
1 with his furious beak
Tears up a sacred hillock, longThe reverence of a village throng,Its altar with their offerings spread,And the gay flag that waved o erhead.She looked and saw the victor standRenting upon his bow his hand:And fierce Sugriva she descried,And Lakshman by his brother's side,She passed them by, nor stayed to view,Swift to her husband's side she flew;Then as she looked, her strength gave way.And in the dust she fell and lay.Then, as if startled ere the closeOf slumber, from the earth she rose.Upon her dying husband, roundWhose soul the coils of Death were wound,Her eyes in agony she bentAnd called him with a shrill lament.Sugriva, when he heard her cries,Aud saw the queen with weeping eyes,
And youthful Angad standing there,
His load of grief could hardly bear.

Footnotes
349:1 A name of Garuda the king of birds, the great 
enemy of the Serpents.
Next: Canto XX.: Tárá's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XX.: TÁRÁ'S LAMENT.
Again she bent her to the ground,
Her arms about her husband wound.Sobbed on his breast, and sick and faintWith anguish poured her wild complaint:Brave in the charge of battle, boastAnd glory of the Vánar host,Why on the cold earth wilt thou lieAnd give no answer when I cry!Up, warrior, from thy lowly bed!A meeter couch for thee is spread.It ill beseems a glorious kingOn the bare ground his limbs to fling.Ah, surely must thy love be strongFor her whom thou hast governed long,If thou, my hero, canst reclineOn her cold breast forsaking mine.Or, famed for justice through the laud.Thou on the road to heaven hast plannedSome city fairer far than thisTo be thy new metropolis.Are all our plasures ended now.With those delicious hours which thouAnd I, dear lord, together spentIn woods that breathed the honey's scent?

Whelmed in my sorrow's boundless sea,
There is no joy, no hope, for me,When my beloved lord, who ledThe Vánars to the fight, is dead,My widowed heart is stern and cold.Or, at the sight mine eyes behold,O'ermastered would it end this acheAnd in a thousand fragments break.Ah noble Vánar, doomed to payThe penalty of all today--Sugriva from his home expelled.And Rumá 
1b from his arms withheld.
Our Vánar race and thee to save.Wise counsel for thy weal I gave;But thou, by wildest folly stirred,Wouldst give no credence to my word.And now wilt woo the nymphs above.And shake their souls with pangs of love.Ah, never could it be that thouBeneath Sugriva's power shouldst bow,Thy conqueror is none but FateWhose mandates all who breathe await.And does no thrill of anguish runThrough the stern breast of Raghu's son,Whose base hand dealt a coward's blow,And smote thee fighting with thy foe!Reft of my lord my days, alas!
p. 350

In bitter bitter woe will pass:
And I, long blest-with every good,Must bear my dreary widowhood.And when his uncle's brow is stern,When his fierce eyes with fury burn,Ah, what will be my Angad's fate,So fair and young and delicate?Come, darling, for the last sad sight,Of thy dear sire who loved the right;For soon thine eyes will long in vainA look at that loved face to gain.And, hero, as thy child draws near,With tender words his spirit cheer;Thy dying wishes gently speak,And kiss him on the brows and cheek.High fame, I ween, has Ráma wonBy this great deed his hand has done,His debt to brave Sugríva paidAnd kept the promise that he made.Be happy, King Sugríva, lordOf Rumá to thine arms restored:Enjoy uninterrupted reign,For he, thy foe, at length is slain.Dost thou not hear me speak, and whyHast thou no word of soft reply?Will thou not lift thine eyes and seeThese dames who look to none but thee?'

From their sad eyes, as Tárá spoke,
The floods of bitter sorrow broke:Then, pressing close to Angad's side,Each lifted up her voice and cried:
How couldst thou leave thine Angad thus,
And go, for ever go, from us--Thy child so dear in brave attire,Graced with the virtues of his sire?If e'er in want of thought, O chief,One deed of mine have caused thee grief,Forgive my folly, I entreat,And with my head I touch thy feet.'
Again the hapless Tárá wept
As to her husband's side she crept,And wild with sorrow and dismaySat on the ground where Bálí lay.
Footnotes
349:1b Sugriva's wife.
Next: Canto XXI.: Hanumán's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXI.: HANUMÁN'S SPEECH.
There, like a fallen star, the dame
Fell by her lord's half lifeless frame;And Hanumán drew softly near,And strove her grieving heart to.cheer:'By changeless law our bliss and woeFrom ancient worth and folly flow.What fruits soe'er we cull, the seedsWere scattered by our former deeds. 
1
Why mourn another's mournful fate,And weep, thyself unfortunate?Be calm, O thou whose heart is wise,for none deserves another's sighs.Look up, with idle sorrow strive:Thy child, his heir, is yet alive.Let needful rites be duly done,Nor in thy woe forget thy son.Regard the law which all obey:They spring to life, they pass away.Begin the task that bids thee rise,And stay these tears, for thou art wise.Our lord the king is doomed to die,On whom ten million hearts rely,

Kind, liberal, patient, true, and just
Was lie in whom they place their trust,And now he seeks the land of thoseWho for the right subdue their foes.Each Vánar lord with all his train,Each ranger of this wild domain,And Angad here, thy darling, seeA governor and friend in thee.These twain 
1b whose hearts with sorrow ache
The funeral rites shall undertake,And Angad by his mother's careBe king, his father's rightful heir.Now let him pay, as laws require,His sacred duty to his sire,Nor one solemnity omitOf all that mighty kings befit.And when thy loud eye sees thine ownDear Angad on his father's throne,Then, lightened of its load of pain,Thy spirit will have rest again.'
She heard his speech, she heaved her head,
Looked upon Hanumán and said,
'Sweeter my slain lord's limbs to touch,
Than Angad or a hundred such.No rule or right, a widowed dame,O'er Angad or the realm I claim,Sugriva is the uncle, he

In every act supreme must be,
I pray thee, chief, this plan resign,Nor claim from me what ne'er is mine.The father with his tender careGuards the dear child the mother bare,Where'er I be, no sweeter task,No happier joy I hope or askThan thus to sit with loving eyesAnd watch the bed where Báli lies.
Footnotes
350:1 "Our deeds still follow with us from afar. And 
what we have been makes us what we are."
Next: Canto XXII.: Báli Dead.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXII.: BÁLI DEAD.
There breathing still with slow faint sighs
Lay Báli on the ground: his eyes,
p. 351
Damp with the tears of death, he raised,On conquering Sugríva gazed,And then in clearest speech expressedThe tender feelings of his breast;'Not to my charge, Sugríva, layThine injuries avenged to-day;But rather blame resistless FateThat urged me on infuriate.Fate ne'er agreed our lives to blessWith simultaneous happiness:To dwell like brothers side by sideIn tender love was still denied.The Vánars' realm is thine to-day:Begin, O King, thy rightful sway;  
1
for I must go at Yama's callTo sojourn in his gloomy hall;Must part and leave this very hourMy life, my realm, my kingly power,And go instead of these to gain

Bright glory free from spot and stain.
Now at thy hands one boon I seekWith the last words my lips shall speak,And, though it be no easy thing,perform the task I give thee, King.This son of mine, no foolish boy,Worthy of bliss and nursed in joy,--See, prostrate on the ground he lies,The hot tears welling from his eyes--The child I love so well, more sweetThan life itself, for woe unmeet,--To him be kindly favour shown:O guard and keep him as thine own.Retain him ever by thy side,His father, helper, friend, and guide.From fear and woe his young life save,And give him all his father gave.Then Tárá's son in time shall beBrave, resolute, and famed like thee,And march before thee to the fightWhere stricken fiends shall own his might.While yet a tender stripling, fameShall bruit abroad his warrior name,And brigbtlv shall his glory shineFor exploits worthy of his line.Child of Sushen, 
2 my Tárá well
Obscurest lore can read and tell;And, trained in wondrous art, divinesEach mystery of boding signs.

Her solemn warning ne'er despise,
Do boldly what her lips advise;For things to come her eye can see,And with her words events agree.And for the son of Raghu's sakeThe toil and danger undertake:
For breach of faith were grievous wrong,
Nor wouldst thou be unpunished long.Now, brother, take this chain of gold,Gift of celestial hands of old,Or when I die its charm will flee,And all its might be lost with me.'
The loving speech Sugríva heard.
And all his heart with woe was stirred.Remorse and gentle pity stoleEach thought of triumph from his soul:Thus fades the light when Ráhu 
1b mars
The glory of the Lord of Stars. 2b
All angry thoughts were staved and stilledAnd kindly love his bosom filled.His brother's word the chief obeyedAnd took the chain as Báli prayed.On little Angad standing nighThe dying hero fixed his eye,And, ready from this world to part,Spoke the fond utterance of his heart:

'Let time and place thy thoughts employ:
In woe be strong, he meek in joy.Accept both pain and pleasure, stillObedient to Sugríva's will.Thou hast, my darling, from the firstWith tender care been softly nursed;But harder days, if thou wouldst winSugríva's love, must now begin.To those who hate him ne'er incline,Nor count his foe a friend of thine.In all thy thoughts his welfare seek,Obedient, lowly, faithful, meek.Let no rash suit his bosom pain,Nor yet from due requsts abstain.  
3b
Each is a grievous fault, betweenThe two is round the happy mean.'
Then Báli ceased: his eyeballs rolled
In stress of anguish uncontrolledHis massive teeth were bared to view,And from the frame the spirit flew.Their lord and leader dead, the crowdOf noblest Vánars shrieked aloud:'Since thou, O King, hast sought the skiesAll desolate Kishkindhá lies.Her woods, where Vánars loved to rove,Are empty now, and hill and grove.From every eye the light is fled,Since thou, our mighty lord, art dead.

Thine was the unwearied arm that bore
The brunt of deadly fight of yoreWith Golabh the Gandharva, when,Lasting through five long years and ten,
p. 352
The dreadful conflict knew no stayIn gloom of night, in glare of day;And when the fifteenth year had pastThy dire opponent fell at last.If such a foeman fell beneathOur hero's arm and awful teethWho freed us from our terror, howIs conquering Báli fallen now?'
Then when they saw their leader slain
Great anguish seized the Vánar train,Weeping their mighty chief, as whenIn pastures near a lion's denThe cows by sudden fear are stirred,Slain the bold bull who led the herd.And hapless Tárá sank belowThe whelming waters of her woe,Looked upon Báli's face and fellBeside him whom she loved go well,Like a young creeper clinging roundA tall tree prostrate on the ground.

Footnotes
350:1b Sugríva and Angad.
351:1 Angad himself, being too young to govern, would 
be Yuvarája or heir- apparent.
351:2 Sushena was the son of Varuna the God of the sea,
351:1b A demon with the tail of a dragon, that causes eclipses by endeavouring to swallow the sun and moon.
351:2b The Lord of Stars is the Moon.
351:3b Or the passage may be interpreted: 'Be neither to obsequious or affectionate, nor wanting in due respect 
of love.'
Next: Canto XXIII.: Tárá's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIII.: TÁRÁ'S LAMENT.
She kissed her lifeless husband's face,
She clasped him in a close embrace,Laid her soft lips upon his head;Then words like these the mourner said:
'No words of mine wouldst thou regard,
And now thy bed is cold and hard.Upon the rude rough ground o'erthrown,Beneath thee naught but sand and stone.To thee the earth is dearer farThan I and my caresses are,If thou upon her breast wilt lie,And to my words make no reply.Ah my beloved, good and brave,Bold to attack and strong to save,Fate is Sugriva's thrall, and weIn him our lord and master see.Lo, by thy bed, a mournful band,Thy Vánar chiefs lamenting stand.O hear thy nobles' groans and cries,O mark thy Angad's Weeping eyes,O list to my entreaties, breakThe chains of slumber and awake.Ah me, my lord, this lowly bed

Where rest thy limbs and fallen head,
Is the cold couch where smitten layThy foemen in the bloody fray.O noble heart from blemish free,Lover of war, beloved by me,Why hast thou fled away and leftThy Tárá of all hope bereft!Unwise the father who allowsHis child to be a warrior's spouse,For, hero, see thy consort's fate,A widow now moat desolate,For ever broken is my pride,My hope of lasting bliss has died,And sinking in the lowest deepOf sorrow's sea I pine and weep.Ah, surely not of earthly mould,This stony heart is stern and cold,Or, in a hundred pieces rent,It had not lingered to lament.Dead, dead! my husband, friend, and lordIn whom my loving hopes were stored,First in the field, his foemen's dread,My own victorious Báli, dead!A woman when her lord has died,Though children flourish by her side,Though stores of gold her coffers fill,Is called a lonely widow still.Alas, thy bleeding gashes makeAround thy limbs a purple lake:

Thus slumbering was thy wont to lie
On cushions bright with crimson dye.Dark streams of welling blood besmearThy limbs where dust and mire adhere,Nor have I strength, weighed down by woe,Mine arms about thy form to throw.The issue of this day has broughtSugriva all his wishes sought,For Ráma shot one shaft and heIs freed from fear and jeopardy.Alas, alas, I may not restMy head upon thy wounded breast,Obstructed by the massive dartDeep buried in thy bleeding heart.'
Then Níla from his bosom drew
The fatal shaft that pierced him through,Like some tremendous serpent deepIn caverns of a hill asleep.As from the hero's wound it came,Shot from the shaft a gleam of flame,Like the last flashes of the sunDescending when his course is run.From the wide rent in crimson floodRushed the full stream of Báli's blood,Like torrents down a mountain's sideWith golden ore and copper dyed.Then Tárá brushed with tender careThe dust of battle from his hair,

While her sad eyes poured down their rain
Upon her lord untimely slain.Once more she looked upon the dead;Then to her bright-eyed child she said:'Turn hither, turn thy weeping eyesWhere low in death thy father lies.By sinful deed and bitter hateOur lord has met his mournful fate.Bright as the sun at early mornTo Yama's halls is Báli borne.Then go, my child, salute the king,From whom our bliss and honour spring.
Obedient to his mother's hest
His father's feet he gently pressed
p. 353
With twining arms and lingering hands:'Father', he cried, there Angad stands.'    Then Tárá: 'Art thou stern and mute,Regardless of thy child's salute?Hast thou no blessing for thy son,No word for little Angad, none?O, hero, at thy lifeless feetHere with my boy I take my seat,As some sad mother of the herd,By the fierce lion undeterred,Lies moaning by the grassy dell

Wherein her lord and leader fell.
How, having wrought that awful rite,The sacrifice of deadly fight.Wherein the shaft by Ráma spedSupplied the place of water shed,How hast thou bathed thee at the endWithout thy wife her aid to lend?  
1
Why do mine eyes no more beholdThy bright beloved chain of gold,Which, pleased with thee, the Immortals' KingAbout thy neck vouchsafed to fling?Still lingering on thy lifeless faceI see the pride of royal race:Thus when the sun has set his glowStill rests upon the Lord of Snow.Alas my hero! undeterredThou wouldst not listen to my word.With tears and prayers I sued in vain:Thou wouldst not listen, and art slain.Gone is my bliss, my glory: IAnd Angad now with thee will die.'
Next: Canto XXIV.: Sugríva's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIV.: SUGRÍVA'S LAMENT.
But when Sugríva saw her weep
O'erwhelmed in sorrow's rushing deep.Swift through his bosom pierced the stingOf anguish for the fallen king.At the sad sight his eyes beheldA flood of bitter tears outwelled,And, with his bosom racked and rent,To Ráma with his train he went.He came with faltering steps and slowWhere Ráma held his mighty bowAnd arrow like a venomed snake,And to the son of Raghu spake:'Well hast thou kept, O King, thy vow:The promised fruit is gathered now.But life is marred, my soul to-dayTurns sickening from all joy away.
For, while this queen laments and sighs
Amid a mourning people's cries,And Angad weeps his father slain,How can my heart delight to reign?For outrage, fury, senseless pride,My brother, doomed of yore, has died.Yet, Raghu's son, in bitter woe

I mourn his fated overthrow.
Ah, better far in pain and illTo dwell on Rishyamúka stillThan gain the heaven of Gods and allIts pleasures by my brother's fall.Did not he cry,--great-hearted foe,--'Go, for I will not slay thee, Go'?With his brave soul those words agree:My speech, my deeds, are worthy me.How can a brother counterweighHis grievous loss with joys of sway,And see with dull unpitying eyeSo brave and good a brother die?His lofty soul was nobly blind:My death alas, he ne'er designed;But I, urged blindly on by hate,Sought with his life my rage to sate.He smote me with a splintered tree:I groaned aloud and turned to flee,From stern reproaches he forbore,And gently bade me sin no more.Serene and dutiful and goodHe kept the laws of brotherhood:I, fierce and greedy, vengeful, base,Showed all the vices of our race.Ah me, dear friend, my brother's fateLays on my soul a crushing weight:A sin no heart should e'er conceive,But at the thought each soul should grieve:

Sin such as Indra's when his blow
Laid heavenly Vis'varúpa  1b low.
Yet earth, the waters of the seas,The race of women and the treesWere fain upon themselves to takeThe weight of sin for Indra's sake.But who a Vánar's soul will free,Or ease the load that crushes me?Wretch that I am, I may not claimThe reverence due to royal name.How shall I reign supreme, or dareAffect the power I should not share?Ah me, I sorrow for my sin,The ruin of my race and kin,Polluted by a hideous crimeWorld-hated till the end of time.Alas, the floods of sorrow rollWith whelming force upon my soul:So gathers the descending rainIn the deep hollow of the plain.
p. 354
Footnotes
353:1 Sacrifices and all religious rites begin and end 
with ablution, and the wife of the officiating Brahman 

takes an important part in the performance of the holy 
ceremonies.
353:1b Vis'varúpa, a son of Twashtri or Vis'vakarma the 
heavenlv architect, was a three-headed monster slain by 
Indra.
Next: Canto XXV.: Ráma's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXV.: RÁMA'S SPEECH.
Then Raghu's son, whose feeling breast
Shared the great woe that moved the rest,Strove with wise charm their grief to easeAnd gently spoke in words like these:    'You ne'er can raise the dead to blissBy agony of grief like thisCease your lament, nor leave undoneThe funeral task you may not shun.As nature orders o'er the deadYour tributary tears are shed,But Fate, directing each event,Is still the lord preeminent.Yes, all obey the changeless lawsOf Fate the universal cause,By Fate, the lives of all proceed,That governs every word and deed,None acts, none sees his hest obeyed.But each and all by Fate are swayed.The world its ordered course maintains,And o'er that course Fate ever reigns.Fate ne'er exceeds the rule of Fate:Is ne'er too swift, is ne'er too late,And making nature its allyForgets no life, nor passes by.

No kith and kin, no power and force
Can check or stay its settled course,No friend or client, grace or charm,That victor of the world disarm.So all who see with prudent eyesThe hand of Fate must recognize,For virtue rules, or love, or gain,As Fate's unchanged decrees ordain.Báli has died and won the meedThat waits in heaven on noble deed,Throned in the seats the brave may reachBy liberal hand and gentle speech,True to a warrior's duty, boldIn fight, the hero lofty-souledDeigned not to guard his life: he died,And now in heaven is glorified.Then cease these tears and wild despair:Turn to the task that claims your care,For Báli's is the glorious fateWhich warriors count most fortunate.'    When Ráma's speech had found a close.Brave Lakshman, terror of his foes,With wise and soothing words addressedSugríva still with woe oppressed:'Arise Sugríva,' thus he said,'Perform the service of the dead.Prepare with Tárá and her sonThat Báli's rites be duly done.A store of funeral wood provide

Which wind and sun and time have dried
And richest sandal fit to graceThe pyre of one of royal race.
With words of comfort soft and kind
Console poor Angad's troubled mind,Nor let thy heart be thus cast down,For thine is now the Vánars' town.Let Angad's care a wreath supply,And raiment rich with varied dye,And oil and perfumes for the fire,And all the solemn rites require.Go, hasten to the town, O King,And Tárá's little quickly bring.A virtue is despatch: and speedIs best of all in hour of need.Go, let a chosen band prepareThe litter of the dead to bear.For stout and tall and strong of limbMust be the cheifs who carry him.'    He spoke,--his friends' delight and pride,--Then stood again by Ráma's side.When Tára  
1 heard the words he said
Within the town he quickly sped,And brought, on stalwart shoulders laid,The litter for the rites arrayed,Framed like a car for Gods, completeWith painted sides and royal seat,With latticed windows deftly made,

And golden birds and trees inlaid:
Well joined and wrought in every part,A marvel of ingenious art.Where pleasure mounds in carven woodAnd many a graven figure stood.The best of jewels o'er it hung,And wreaths of flowers around it clung,And over all was raised on highA canopy of saffron dye,While like the sun of morning shoneThe billiant blooms that lay thereon.That glorious litter Ráma eyed.And spake to Lakshman by his side:'Let Báli on the bier be placedAnd with all funeral service graced.'Sugríva then with many a tearDrew Báli's body to the bierWhereon, with weeping Angad's aid,The relics of the chief were laidNeath many a vesture's varied fold,And wreaths and ornaments and gold.Then King Sugríva bade them speedThe obsequies by law decreed:'Let Vánars lead the way and throwRich gems around them as they go,And be the chosen bearers nearBehind them, laden with the bier.No costly rite may you deny,Used when the proudest monarchs die:

As for a king of widest sway.
Perform his obsequies to-day,'
p. 355
Sugríva gave his high behest;Then Princely Tára and the rest,With little Angad weeping, ledThe long procession of the dead.Behind the funeral litter came,With Tára first, each widowed dameIn tears and shrieks her loss deplored,Add cried aloud, My lord! My lord!While wood and hill and valley sentIn echoes back the shrill lament.Then on a low and sandy isleWas reared the hero's funeral pileBy crowds of toiling Vánars, whereThe mountain stream ran fresh and fair.The Vánar chiefs, a noble band,Had laid the litter on the sand,And stood a little space apart,Each mourning in his inmost heart.But Tára, when her weeping eyeSaw Báli, on the litter lie,Laid his dear head upon her lap,And wailed aloud her dire mishap;'O mighty Vánar, lord and king,To whose fond breast brave, and bold,

Rise, look upon me as of old.
Rise up, my sovereign, dost thou seeA crowd of subjects weep for thee?Still o'er thy face, though breath has fled.The joyous light of life is spread:Thus around the sun, although he set,A crimson glory lingers yet.Death clad in Ráma's form to-dayHast dragged thee from the world away.One shaft from his tremendous bowDooms us to widowhood and woe.Hast thou, O Vánar King, no eyesThy weeping wives to recognize,Who for the length of way unmeetHave followed thee with weary feet?Yet every moon-faced beauty hereBy thee, O King was counted dear.Lord of the Vánar race, hast thouNo eyes to see Sugríva now?About thee stands in mournful moodA sore-afflicted multitude,And Tára and thy lords of stateAround their monarch weep and wait,Arise my lord, with gentle speech,As was thy wont, dismissing each,Then in the forest will we playAnd love shall make our spirits gay.'   The Vánar dames raised Tára, drownedIn floods of sorrow, from the ground;

And Angad with Sugríva's aid,
O'erwhelmed with anguish and dismayed,Weeping for his departed sire,Placed Bali's body on the pyre:Then lit the flame, and round the deadPaced slowly with a mourner's tread.Thus with full rites the funeral train.Performed the service for the slain,Then sought the flowing stream and madeLibations to the parted shade.There, setting Angad first in place,The chieftains of the Vanar race,With Tára and Sugríva, shedThe water that delights the dead.
Footnotes
354:1 The Vánar chief, not to be confounded with Tárá.
Next: Canto XXVI.: The Coronation.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVI.: THE CORONATION.
Each Vánar councillor and peer
In crowded numbers gathered nearSugriva, mournful king, while yetHis vesture from the wave was wet,Before the chief of Raghu's seedUnwearied in each arduous deed,They stood and raised the reverent handAs saints before Lord Brahmá stand,Then Hanumán of massive mould,Like some tall hill of glistering gold,Son of the God whose wild blasts shakeThe forest, thus to Ráma spake:'By thy kind favour, O my lord,Sugríva, to his home restoredTriumphant, has regained to-dayHis rank and power and royal sway.He now will call each faithful friend,Enter the city, and attendWith sage advice and prudent careTo every task that waits him there.Then balm and unguent shall anointOur monarch, as the laws appoint,And gems and precious wreaths shall beHis grateful offering, King, to thee.

Do thou, O Ráma, with thy friend
Thy steps within the city bend;Our ruler on his throne install,And with thy presence cheer us all.'   Then, skilled in lore and arts that guideThe speaker, Raghu's son replied:'For fourteen years I might not breakThe mandate that my father spake;Nor can I, till that time be fled,The street of town or village tread.Let King Sugríva seek the townMost worthy of her high renown,There let him be without delayAnointed, and begin his sway.   This answered, to Sugríva thenThus spake anew the king of men:'Do thou who knowest right ordainPrince Angad consort of thy reign;For he is noble, true, and bold,And trained a righteous course to holdGifts like his sire's thait youth adornBorn eldest to the eldest born.
p. 356
This is the month of Srávana 1first
Of those that see the rain-clouds burst.Four months, thou knowest well, extendsThe season when the rain descends.

No time for deeds of war is this.
Seek thou thy fair metropolis,And I with Lakshman, O my friend,The time upon this hill will spend.An ample cavern opens thereMade lovely by the mountain air,And lotuses and lilies fillThe pleasant lake and murmuring rill.When Kártik's  
2 month shall clear the skies,
Then tempt the mighty enterprise.Now, chieftain to thy home repair,And be anointed sovereign there.'
Sugríva heard: he bowed his head:
Within the lovely town he spedWhich Bali's royal will had swayed,Where thousand Vánar chiefs arrayedGathered in order round their king,And led him on with welcoming.Low on the earth the lesser crowdFell in prostration as they bowed.Sugríva looked with grateful eyes,Spake to them all and bade them rise.Then through the royal bowers he strodeWherein the monarch's wives abode.Soon from the inner chambers cameThe Vánar of exalted fame;And joyful friends drew near and shedKing-making balm upon his head,

Like Gods anointing in the skies
Their sovereign of the thousand eyes.  3
Then brought they, o'er their king to holdThe white umbrella decked with gold,And chouries with their waving hairIn golden handles wondrous fair;And fragrant herbs and seed and spice,And sparkling gems exceeding price,And every bloom from woods and leas,
And gum distilled from milky trees;
And precious ointment white as milk,And spotless robes of cloth and silk,Wreaths of sweet flowers whose glories gleamIn grassy grove, on lake or stream.And fragrant sandal and each scentThat makes the soft breeze redolent;Grain, honey, odorous seed, and storeOf oil and curd and golden ore;A noble tiger's skin, a pairOf sandals wrought with costliest care,Eight pairs of damsels drawing nighBrought unguents stained with varied dye.Then gems and cates and robes displayedBefore the twice-born priests were laid,That they would deign in order dueTo consecrate the king anew.The sacred grass was duly spreadAnd sacrificial flame was fed,

Which Scripture-learned priests supplied
With oil which texts had sanctified.Then, with all rites ordained of old,High on the terrace bright with gold,Whereon a glorious carpet lay,And fresh-culled garlands sweet and gay,Placed on his throne, Sugríva bentHis looks toward the Orient.In horns from forehead of the bull.In pitchers bright and beautiful,In urns of gold the Vánara tookPure water brought from stream and brook,From every consecrated strandAnd every sea that beats the land.Then, as prescribed by sacred loreAnd many a mighty sage of yore,  
1b
The leaders of the Vánars pouredThe sacred water on their lord.  
2b
From every Vánar at the closeOf that imperial rite aroseShouts of glad triumph, loud and longRepeated by the high-souled throng.Sugríva, when the rite was done,Obeyed the hest of Raghu's son.Prince Angad to his breast he strained.And partner of his sway ordained.Once more from all the host rang outThe loud huzza and jovful shout.'Well done! well done!' each Vánar cried.

And good Sugríva glorified.
p. 357
Then with glad voices loudly raised
Were Ráma and his brother praised;And bright Kishkindha shone that dayWith happy throngs and banners gay.
Footnotes
356:1 S'rávan: July-August. But the rains begin a month 
earlier, and what follows must not be taken literally. 
The text has púrvo' yam várshiko másah S'rávanah ###. The Bengal recension has the same, and Gorresio translates: ' Equesto il mese S'râvana (Inglio-agosto) primo della stagione plovosa, in cui diligano le acque.'
356:2 Kártik: Ootober-November.
356:3 "Indras, as the nocturnal sun, hides himself, 
transformed, in the starry heavens: the stars are his eyes. 
The hundred- eyed or all-seeing (panoptês) Argos placed as a spy over the actions of the cow beloved by Zeus, in the Hellenic equivalent of this form of Indras." DE GUBERNATIS, Zoological Mythology, Vol. I, p. 

418.
356:1b Baudháyana and others.
356:2b Sugríva appears to hare been consecrated with 
all the ceremonies that attended the Abhisheka or 
coronation of an Indian prince of the Aryan race. Compare the preparations made for Rama's consecration, Book II. Canto III. Thus Homer frequently introduces into Troy the rites of Hellenic worship.
Next: Canto XXVII.: Ráma On The Hill.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVII.: RÁMA ON THE HILL.
But when the solemn rite was o'er,
And bold Sugríva reigned once more,The sons of Rhaghu sought the hill,Prasravan of the rushing rill,Where roamed the tiger and the deer,And lions raised their voice of fear;Thick set with trees of every kind,With trailing shrubs and plants entwined;Home of the ape and monkey, lairOf mountain cat and pard and bear,In cloudy gloom against the skyThe sanctifying hills rose high.Pierced in their crest, a spacious caveTo Raghu's sons a shelter gave.Then Ráma, pure from every crime,In words well suited to the timeTo Lakshman spake, whose faithful zealWatched humbly for his brother's weal:'I love this spacious cavern whereThere breathes a fresh and pleasant air.Brave brother, let us here remainThroughout the season of the rain.For in mine eyes this mountain crestIs above all, the loveliest.

Where copper-hued and black and white
Show the huge blocks that face the height;Where gleams the shine of varied ore,Where dark clouds baog and torrents roar;Where waving woods are fair to see,And creepers climb from tree to tree;Where the gay peacock's voice is shrill,And sweet birds carol on the hill;Where odorous breath is wafted farFrom Jessamine and Sinduvár;  
1
And opening flowers of every hueGive wondrous beauty to the view.See, too, this pleasant water nearOur cavern home is fresh and clear;And lilies gay with flower and budAre glorious on the lovely flood.This cave that fares north and eastWill shelter us till rain has ceased;And towering hills thut rise behindWill screen us from the furious wind.Close by the cavern's portal liesAnd level stone of ample sizeAnd sable hue, a mighty blockLong severed from the parent rock.Now let thine eye bent northward rest
A while upon that mountain creat,
High as a cloud that brings the rain,And dark as iron rent in twain.

Look southward, brother, now and view
A cloudy pile of paler hueLike Mount Kailása's topmost heightWhere ores of every tint are bright,See, Lakshman, see before our caveThat clear brook eastward roll its waveAs though 'twere Ganga's infant rillDown streaming from the three-peaked billSee, by the water's gentle flowAs'oka, sal, and sandal grow.And every lovely tree most fairWith leaf and bud and flower is there.See there, beneath the bending treesThat fringe her bank, the river flees,Clothed with their beauty like a maidIn all her robes and gems arrayed,While from the sedgy banks are heardThe soft notes of each amorous bird.O see what lovely islets studLike gems the bosom of the flood.And sárases and wild swans crowdAbout her till she laughs aloud.See, lotus blooms the brook o'erspread,Some tender blue, some dazzling red,And opening lilies white as snowTheir buds in rich profusion show.There rings the joyous peacock's scream,There stands the curlew by the stream,And holy hermits love to throng

Where the sweet waters speed along.
Ranged on the grassy margin shineGay sandal trees in glittering line,And all the wondrous verdure seemsThe offspring of creative dreams,O conquering Prince, there cannot beA lovelier place than this we see.Here sheltered on the beauteous heightOur days will pass in calm delight.
Nor is Kishkindhá's city, gay
With grove and garden, far away.Thence will the breeze of evening bringSweet music as the minstrels sing;And, when the Vánars dance, will comeThe sound of labour and of drum.Again to spouse and realm restored.Girt by his friends, the Vánar lordGreat glory has acquired; and howCan he be less than happy now?'This said, the son of Raghu madeHis dwelling in that pleasant shadeUpon the mountain's shelving sideThat sweetly all his wants supplied.But still the hero's troubled mindNo comfort in his woe could find.Yet mourning for his stolen wifeDearer to Ráma than his life.Chief when he saw the Lord of Night

Rise slowly o'er the eastern height,
p. 358
He tossed upon his leafy bed
With eyes by sleep unvisited.Outwelled the tears in ceaseless flow,And every sense was numbed by woe.Each pang that pierced the mourner throughSmote Lakshman's faithful bosom too,Who, troubled for his brother's sake,With wisest words the prince bespake:'Arise, my brother, and be strong:Thy hero heart has mourned too long.Thou knowest well that tears and sighsWill mar the mightiest enterprise.Thine was the soul that loved to dare:To serve the Gods was still thy care;And ne'er may sorrow's sting subdueA heart so resolute and true.How canst thou hope to slay in fightThe giant cruel in his might?Unwearied must the champion beWho strives with such a foe as he.Tear out this sorrow by the root;Again be bold and resolute.Arise, my brother, and subdueThe demon and his wicked crew.Thou canst destroy the earth, her seas,

Her rooted hills and giant trees
Unseated by thy furious hand:And shall one fiend thy power withstand?Wait through this season of the rainTill suns of autumn dry the plain,Then shall thy giant foe, and allHis host and realm, before thee fall.I wake thy valour that has sleptAmid the tears thine eyes have wept;As drops of oil in worship raiseThe dormant flame to sudden blaze.'
The son of Raghu heard: he knew
His brother's rede was wise and true;And, honouring his friendly guide,In gentle words he thus replied:'Whate'er a hero firm and bold,,Devoted, true, and lofty-souledShould speak by deep affection led,Such are the words which thou hast said.I cast away each pensive thoughtThat brings the noblest plans to naught,And each uninjured power will strainUntil the purposed end we gain.Thy prudent words will I obey,And till the close of rain-time stay,When King Sugríva will inviteTo action, and the streams be bright.The hero saved in hour of need

Repays the debt with friendly deed:
But hated by the good are theyWho take the boon and ne'er repay.'
Footnotes
357:1 Vitex Negundo.
Next: Canto XXVIII.: The Rains.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVIII.: THE RAINS.
'See, brother, see' thus Ráma cried
On Mályavat's  1 dark-wooded side,
'A chain of clouds. like lofty hills,The sky with gathering shadow fills.Nine months those clouds have borne the loadConceived from sunbeams as they glowed,And, having drunk the seas, give birth,And drop their offspring on the earth.Easy it seems at such a timeThat flight of cloudy stairs to climb,And, from their summit, safely won,Hang flowery wreaths about the sun.Bee how the flash of evening's redFringes the fleecy clouds o'erheadTill all the sky is streaked and linedWith bleeding wounds incarnadined,Or the wide firmament aboveShows like a lover sick with loveAnd, pale with cloudlets, heaves a sighln the soft breeze that wanders by.See, by the fervent heat embrowned,How drenched with recent showers, the groundPours out in floods her gushing tears,Like Sítá wild with torturing fears.

So softly blows this cloud-borne breeze
Cool through the boughs of camphor treesThat one might hold it in the cupOf hollowed hands and drink it up.See, brother, where that rocky steep,Where odorous shrubs in rain-drops weep,Shows like Sugríva when they shedTne royal balm upon his head.Like students at their task appearThese hills whose misty peaks are near:Black deerskin  
2 garments wrought of cloud
Their forms with fitting mantles shroud,Each torrent from the summit pouredSupplies the place of sacred cord.  
3
And winds that in their caverns moan.
p. 359
Sound like the voice's undertone.  1
From east to west red lightnings flash,And, quivering neath the golden lash,The great sky like a generous steedGroans inly at each call to speedYon lightning, as it flashes throughThe giant cloud of sable hue,Recalls my votaress Sítá pressedMid struggles to the demon's breast.See, on those mountain ridges standSweet shrubs that bud and bloom expand.

The soft ram ends their pangs of grief.
And drops its pearls on flower and leaf.But all their raptures stab me throughAnd wake my pining love anew.  
2
Now through the air no wild bird flies,Each lily shuts her weary eyes;And blooms of opening jasmin showThe parting sun has ceased to glowNo captain now for conquest burns,But homeward with his host returns;For roads and kings' ambitious dreamsHave vanished neath descending streams.This is the watery month 
3 wherein
The Sáman's  4 sacred chants begin.
Áshádha  5 past, now Kosal's lord  6
The harvest of the spring has stored,  7
And dwells within his palace freed
From every care of pressing need
Full is the moon, and fierce and strongImpetuous Sarjú  
1b roars along
As though Ayodhyá's crowds ran outTo greet their king with echoing shout.In this sweet time of ease and restNo care disturbs Sugríva's breast,The foe that marred his peace o'erthrown,And queen and realm once more his own.Alas, a harder fate is mine,Reft both of realm and queen to pine,

And, like the bank which floods erode,
I sink beneath my sorrow's load.Sore on my soul my miseries weigh,And these long rains our action stay,While Rávan seems a mightier foeThan I dare hope to overthrow.I saw the roads were barred by rain,I knew the hopes of war were vain;Nor could I bid Sugríva rise,Though prompt to aid my enterprise.E'en now I scarce can urge my friendOn whom his house and realm depend,Who, after toil and peril past,Is happy with his queen at last.Sugríva after rest will knowThe hour is come to strike the blow,Nor will his grateful soul forgetMy succour, or deny the debtI know his generous heart, and henceAwait the time with confidenceWhen he his friendly zeal will show,And brooks again untroubled flow.'  
2b
Footnotes
358:1 Mályavat: "The name of this mountain appears to 

me to be erroneous, and I think that instead o£ Mályavat 
should be read Malayavat, Malaya is a group of mountains situated exactly in that southern part of India where Ráma now was. while Mályavat is placed to the north east." GORRESIO.
358:2 Mantles of the skin of the black antelope were the 
prescribed dress of ascetics and religious students.
358:3 The sacred cord worn as the badge of religious initiation by men of the three twice-born castes.
359:1 The hum with which students con their tasks.
359:2 I omit here a long general description of the rainy season which (is?) not found in the Bengal recension 
and appears to have been interpolated by a far inferior and much later hand than Valmiki's. It is composed in a metre different from that of the rest of the Canto, and contains figures of poetical rhetoric and commonplaces which are the delight of more recent poets.
359:3 Praushthapada or Bhadra, the modern *Bhaden*, 
corresponds to half of August and half of September.
359:4 The Sáman or Sáma-veda, the third of the four Vedas, is really merely a reproduction of parts of the 
Rig-veda, transposed and scattered about piece-meal, 

only 78 verses in the whole being, it is said, untraceable 
to the present recension of the Rig-veda.
359:5 Áshádha is the month corresponding to parts of 
June and July.
359:6 Bharat, who was regent during Ráma's absence.
359:7 Or with Goriesio, following the gloss of another commentary: "Has completed every holy rite and 
accumulated stores of merit."
Next: Canto XXIX.: Hanumán's Counsel.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIX.: HANUMÁN'S COUNSEL.
No flash of lightning lit the sky.
No cloudlet marred the blue on high.The Saras  
3b missed the welcome rain,
The moon's full beams were bright again.Sugríva, lapped in bliss, forgotThe claims of faith, or heeded not;And by alluring joys misledThe path of falsehood learned to treadIn careless ease he passed each hour,And dallied in his lady's bowerEach longing of his heart was stilled,And every lofty hope fulfilled.With royal Rumá by his side,Or Tará yet a dearer bride,
p. 360
He spent each joyous day and nightIn revelry and wild delight,Like Indra whom the nymphs enticeTo taste the joys of Paradise.The power to courtiers' hands resigned,To all their acts his eyes were blind.All doubt, all fear he cast aside

And lived with pleasure for his guide.
But sage Hanumán, firm and true,Whose heart the lore of Scripture knew,Well trained to meet occasion, trainedIn all by duty's law ordained,Strove with his prudent speech to find*Set* access to the monarch's mind.He, skilled in every gentle artOf eloquence that wins the heart,Sugríva from his trance to wake,His salutary counsel spake:  'The realm is won, thy name advanced,The glory of thy house enhanced,And now thy foremost care should heTo aid the friends who succoured thee.He who is firm and faithful foundTo friendly ties in honour bound,Will see his name and fame increaseWide sway is his who truly boastsThat friends and treasure, self and hosts,Are blest in one harmonious whole,Are subject to his firm control.Do thou, whose footsteps never strayFrom the clear bounds of duty's way.Assist, as honour bids thee, nowThy friends, observant of thy vow.For if all cares we lay not by.And to our friend's assistance fly.We, after, toil in idle haste,

And all the late endeavour waste.
Up! nor the promised help delayUntil the hour have slipped away.Up! and with Raghu's son renewThe search for Sitá lost to view.The hour is come: he hears the call,But not on thee reproaches fallFrom him who labours to repressHis eager spirit's restlessness.Long joined to thee in friendly tiesHe made thy fame and fortune rise,In gentle gifts by none excelled.In splendid might unparalleled.Up, to his succour, King! repayThe favour of that prosperous day,And to thy bravest captains sendPrompt mandates to assist thy friend,Tbe cry for help thou wilt not spurnAlthough no grace demands return:And wilt thou not thine aid affordTo him who realm and life restored?Exert thy power, and thou hast wonThe love of Dasaratha's son:And will then for his summons wait,And till he call thee, hesitate?Think not the hero needs thy powerTo save him in the desperate hour:He with his arrows could subdueThe Gods and all the demon crew,

And only waits that he may see
Redeemed the promise made by thee.For thee he risked his life and fought,For thee that great deliverance wrought.Then let us trace through earth and skiesHis lady wheresoe'er she lies.Through realms above, beneath, we flee,And plant our footsteps on the sea.Tnen why, O Lord of Vanary, stillDelay us waiting for thy will?Give thy commands, O King, and sayWhat task has each and where the way.Before thee myriad Vanars standTo sweep through heaven, o'er seas and land.'  Sugriva heard the timely redeThat roused him in the day of need,And thus to Nila prompt and braveHis hest the imperial Vanar gave:   'Go, Nila, to the distant hostsThat keep in arms their several posts,And all the armies that protectThe quarters,  
1 with their chiefs, collect.
To all the luminaries placedIn intermediate regions haste,And bid each captain rise and leadHis squadrons to their king with speedDo thou meanwhile with strictest careAll that the time requires prepare.The loitering Vanar who delays

To gather here ere thrice five days,
Shall surely die for his offence,Condemned for sinful negligence.'
Footnotes
359:1b The river on which Ayodhyá was built.
359:2b I omit a sloka or f***s on altitude and 
lugratirade repeated word for word from the la Canto
359:3b The Indian crane a magnificent bird easily domesticated.
Next: Canto XXX.: Ráma's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXX.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.
But Ráma in the autumn night
Stood musing on the mountain height.While grief and love that scorned controlShook with wild storms the hero's soul.Clear was the sky, without a cloudThe glory of the moon to shroud.And bright with purest silver shoneEach hill the soft beams looked upon,He knew Sugriva's heart was bentOn pleasure, gay and negligent.He thought on Janak's child forlornFrom his fond arms for ever torn.He mourned occasion slipping by,And faint with anguish heaved each sigh
p. 361
He sat where many a varied streakOf rich ore marked the mountain peak.He raised his eyes the skv to view.And to his love his sad thoughts flew.He. heard the Sáras cry, and faintWith sorrow poured his love-born plaint:She, she who mocked the softest tone

Of wild birds' voices with her own,--
Where strays she now, my love who playedSo happy in our hermit shade 'How can my absent love beholdThe bright trees with their flowers of gold,And a11 their gleaming glory seeWith eyes that vainly look for me?How is it with my darling whenFrom the deep tangles of the glenFloat carols of each bird elateWith rapture singing to his mate?In vain my weary glances roveFrom lake to hill, from stream to grove:I find no rapture in the scene,And languish fur my fawn-eyed queen.Ah, does strong love with wild unrest,Born no the autumn, stir her breast?And does the gentle lady pineTill her bright eyes shall look in mine?'   Thus Raghu's son in piteous tone,O'erwhelmed with sorrow, made his moan.E'en as the bird that drinks the rains  
1
To Indra thousand-eyed complains.Then Lakshman who had wandered throughThe copses where the berries grew,Returning to the cavern foundHis brother chief* in sorrow drowned,And pitying the woes that brokeThe spirit, of the hero spoke:

   'Why east thy strength of soul away,
And weakly yield to passion's sway?Arise, my brother, do and dareEre action perish in despair.Refill the firmness of thy heart,And nerve thee for a hero's part.Whose is the hand unscathed to siezeThe red flame quickened by the breeze?Where is the foe will dare to wrongOr keep the Maithil lady long?'Then with pale lips that sorrow driedThe son of Raghu thus replied:Lord Indra thousand-eyed, has sentThe sweet rain from the firmament,Sees the rich promise of the grain,And turns him to his rest again.The clouds with voices loud and deep,Veiling each tree upon the steep,Up on the thirsty earth have shedTheir precious burden and are fled.
Now in kings' hearts ambition glows:
They rush to battle with their foes; 
1b
But in Sugríva's sloth I seeNo care for deeds of chivalry.See, Lakshman, on each breezy heightA thousand autumn blooms are bright.See how the wings of wild swans gleamOn every islet of the stream.

Four months of flood and rain are past:
A hundred years they seemed to lastTo me whom toil and trouble tried,My Sitá severed from my side.She, gentlest woman, weak and young,Still to her lord unwearied clung.Still by the exile's side she stoodIn the wild ways of Dandak wood,Like a fond bird disconsolateIf parted from her darling mate.Sugríva, lapped in soft repose.Untouched by pity for my woes,Scorns the poor exile, dispossessed,By Rávan's mightier arm oppressed,The wretch who comes to sue and prayFrom his lost kingdom far away.Hence falls on me the Vánar's scorn,A suitor friendless and forlorn.The time is come: with heedless eyeHe sees the hour of action fly,--Unmindful, now his hopes succeed,Of promise made in stress of need.Go seek him sunk in bliss and sloth,Forgetful of his royal oath,And as mine envoy thus upbraidThe monarch for his help delayed:'Vile is the wretch who will not payThe favour of an earlier day,Hope in the supplicant's breast awakes,

And then his plighted promise breaks.
Noblest, mid all of women born,Who keeps the words his lips have sworn.Yea, if those words be good or ill.Maintains his faith unbroken still.The *ss who forget to aidThe friend who helped them when they prayed,Dishonoured in their death shall lie,And dogs shall pass their corpses by.Sure thou wouldst see my strained arm holdMy bow of battle backed with gold,Wouldst gaze upon its awful fromLike lightning flashing through the storm,And hear the clanging bowstring loudAs thunder from a labouring cloud   His valour and his strength I know:But pleasure's sway now sinks them lowWith thee, my brother, for allyThat strength and valour I defy
p. 362
He promised, when the rains should end,The succour of his arm to lend.Those months are past: he dares forget.And, lapped in pleasure, slumbers yet.No thought disturbs his careless breastFor us impatient and distressed.And, while we sadly wait and pine,

Girt by his lords he quaffs the wine.
Go, brother, go, his palace seek,And boldly to Sugríva speak.Thus give the listless king to knowWhat waits him if my anger glow:Still open, to the gloomy God,Lies the sad path that Báli trod.'Still to thy plighted word be true,Lest thou, O King, that path pursue.I launched the shaft I pointed well.And Báli, only Báli, fell.But, if from truth thou dare to stray,Both thee and thine this hand shall slay.'Thus be the Vánar king addressed,Then add thyself what seems the best.
Footnotes
360:1 The troops who guard the frontiers on the north, 
south, east and west.
361:1 The Chátake, Cualus Melanoleucus, is supposed to drink nothing but the water for the clouds.
361:1b The time for warlike expeditions began when the rains had ceased.

Next: Canto XXXI.: The Envoy.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXI.: THE ENVOY.
Thus Ráma spoke, and Lakshman then
Made answer to the prince of men:'Yea, if the Vánar, undeterredBy fear of vengeance, break his word,Loss of his royal power ere longShall pay the traitor for the wrong,Nor deem I him so void of senseTo brave the bitter consequence.But if enslaved to joy he lie,And scorn thy grace with blinded eye,Then let him join his brother slain:Unmeet were such a wretch to reign.Quick rises, kindling in my breast,The wrath that will not be repressed,And bids me in my fury slayThe breaker of his faith to-day.Let Báli's son thy consort traceWith bravest chiefs of Vánar race.'
Thus spoke the hero, and aglow
With rage of battle seized his bow.But Ráma thus in gentler moodWith fitting words his speech renewed:'No hero with a soul like thine

To paths of sin will e'er incline.
He who his angry heart can tameIs worthiest of a hero's name.Not thine, my brother, be the partSo alien from the tender heart,Nor let thy feet by wrath misledForsake the path they loved to tread.From harsh and angry words abstain:With gentle speech a hearing gain,And tax Sugríva with the crimeOf failing faith and wasted time.'
Then Lakshman, bravest of the brave,
Obeyed the best that Ráma gave,To whom devoting every thoughtThe Vánar's royal town he sought.As Mandar's mountain heaves on highHis curved peak soaring to the sky,So Lakshman showed, his dread bow bentLike Indra's  
1 in the firmament.
His brother's wrath, his brother's woeInflamed his soul to fiercest glow.The tallest trees to earth were castAs furious on his way he passed,And where he stepped, so fiercely fleet,The stones were shivered by his feet.He reached Kishkindhá's city deepEmbosomed where the hills were steep,Where street and open square were lined

With legions of the Vánar kind.
Then, as his lips with fury swelled,The lord of Raghu's line beheldA stream of Vánar chiefs outpouredTo do obeisance to their lord.But when the mighty prince in viewOf the thick coming Vánars drew,They turned them in amaze to seizeCrags of the rock and giant trees.He saw, and fiercer waxed his ire,As oil lends fury to the fire.Scarce bad the Vánar chieftains seenThat wrathful eye, that troubled mienFierce as the God's who rules the dead,When, turned in wild affright, they fled,Speeding in breathless terror allSought King Sugríva's council hall,And there made known their tale of fear,That Lakshman wild with rage, was near.The king, untroubled by alarms,Held Tára in his amorous arms,And in the distant bower with herHeard not each clamorous messenger.Then, summoned at the lords' behestForth from the city portals pressed.Each like some elephant or cloud,The Vánars in a trembling cloud:Fierce warriors all with massive jawsAnd terrors of their tiger claws.

Some matched ten elephants, and some
A hundred's strength could overcome.Some chieftains, mightier than the rest,Ten times a hundred's force possessed.With eyes of fury Lakshman viewedThe Vánars' tree-armed multitude.Thus garrisoned from side to sideThe city walls assault defied.Beyond the moat that girt the wallAdvanced the Vánar chiefs; and allUpon the plain in *numbers *made,(?)Impetuous warriors, stood arrayed.
p. 363
Red at the sight flashed Lakshman's eyes,His bosom heaved tumultuous sighs,And forth the fire of fury brokeLike flame that flashes through the smoke.Like some fierce snake the hero stood:His bow recalled the expanded hood,And in his shaft-head bright and keenThe flickering of its tongue was seen:And in his own all-conquering mightThe venom of its deadly bite.Prince Angad marked his angry look,And every hope his heart forsook.Then, his large eyes with fury red,To Angad Lakshman turned and said:

   'Go tell the king that Lakshman waits
For audience at the city gates,Whose heart, O tamer of thy foes,Is heavy with his brother's woes.Bid him to Ráma's word attend,And ask if he will aid his friend.Go, let the king my message learn:Then hither with all speed return.'   Prince Angad heard and wild with griefCried as he looked upon the chief:''Tis Lakshman's self: impelled by ireHe seeks the city of my sire.'At the fierce words and furious lookOf Raghu'a son he quailed and shook,Back through the city gates he sped,And, laden with the tale of dread,Sought King Sugríva, filled his earsAnd Rumá's with his doubts and fears.To Rumá and the king he bent,And clasped their feet most reverent,Clasped the dear feet of Tárá, too,And told the startling tale anew.   But King Sugríva's ear was dulled,By love and wine and languor lulled,Nor did the words that Angad spakeThe slumberer from his trance awake.But soon as Raghu's son came nighThe startled Vánars raised a cry,And strove to win his grace, while dread

Each anxious heart disquieted.
They saw, and, as they gathered round,Rose from the mighty throng a soundLike torrents when they downward dash,Or thunder with the lightning's flash.The shouting of the Vánars brokeSugriva's slumber, and he woke:Still with the wine his eyes were red,His neck with flowers was garlanded.Roused at the voice of Angad cameTwo Vánar lords of rank and fame;One Yaksha, one Prabhava hight,-Wise counsellors of gain and right.They came and raised their voices high,And told that Raghu's son was nigh:'Two brothers steadfast in their truth,Each glorious in the bloom of youth,Worthy of rule, have left the skies,
And clothed their forms in men's disguise.
One at thy gates, in warlike handsHolding his mighty weapon, stands.His message is the charioteerThat brings the eager envoy near,Urged onward by his bold intent,And by the hest of Ráma sent. 
1
The gathered Vánars saw and fled,And raised aloud their cry of dread.Son of Queen Tárá, Angad ran

To parley with the godlike man.
Still fiery-eyed with rage and hateStands Lakshman at the city gate,And trembling Vanars scarce can flyScathed by the lightning of his eye.Go with thy son, thy kith and kin,The favour of the prince to win,And bow thy reverent head that soHis fiery wrath may cease to glow.What righteous Ráma bids thee, do,And to thy plighted word be true.'
Footnotes
362:1 The rainbow.
Next: Canto XXXII.: Hanuman's Counsel.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXII.: HANUMAN'S COUNSEL.
Sugríva heard, and, trained and tried
In counsel, to his lords replied:'No deed of mine, no hasty wordThe anger of the prince has stirred.But haply some who hate me stillAnd watch their time to work me ill,Have slandered me to Raghu's son,Accused of deeds I ne'er have done.Now, O my lords--for you are wise--Speak truly what your hearts advise.And, pondering each event, inquireThe reason of the prince's ire.No fear have I of Lakshman: none:No dread of Raghu's mightier son.But wrath, that fires a friendly breastWithout due cause, distrubs my rest.With labour light is friendship gained.But with severest toil maintained.And doubt is strong, and faith is weak,
p. 364
And friendship dies when traitors speak.Hence is my troubled bosom cold

With fear of Rama lofty-souled;
For heavy on my spirit weighHis favours I can ne'er repay.'   He ceased: and Hanuman of allThe Vánars in the council hallIn wisdom first, and rank, expressedThe thoughts that filled his prudent breast:'No marvel thou rememberest yetThe service thou shouldst ne'er forget,How the brave prince of Raghu'a seedThy days from fear and peril freed;And Báli for thy sake o'erthrew,Whom Indra's self might scarce subdue.I doubt not Ráma's anger burnsFor the scant love thy heart returns.For this he sends his brother, himWhose glory never waxes dim.Sunk in repose thy careless eyeMarks not the seasons as they fly,Nor sees that autumn has begunWith dark blooms opening to the sun.Clear is the sky no cloudlet marsThe splendour of the shining stars.The balmy air is soft and still,And clear and bright are lake and rill.Thou heedest not with blinded eyesThe hour for warlike enterprise.Hence Lakshman hither comes to breakThy slothful trance and bid thee wake.

Then, Monarch, with a patient ear
The high-souled Ráma's message hear,Which, reft of wife and realm and friends,Thus by another's mouth he sends.Thou, Vánar King, hast done amiss:And now I see no way but this;Before his envoy humbly standAnd sue for peace with suppliant hand.High duty bids a courtier seekHis master's weal, and freely speak.So by no thought of fear controlledMy speech, O King, is free and bold,For Ráma, if his anger glow,Can, with the terrors of his bow.This earth with all the Gods subdue,Gandharvas, 
1 and the demon crew.
Unwise to stir his wrathful moodWhose favour must again be wooed.And, most of all, unwise for oneGrateful like thee for service done.Go with thy son and kinsmen: bendThy humble head and greet thy friend.And, like a fond obedient spouse,Be faithful to thy plighted vows.
Footnotes

363:1 In a note on the corresponding passage in the 
Bengal recension Gorresio says: 'The text here makes 
use of a strange and something more than bold metaphor which I have sought to modify. The text says: "Here is Lakshman the charioteer of words who by the orders of Rama has come hither upon the ear of resolution." In his Italian translation he renders the passage: "Here is Laksh- man, the brother of Rama who by his orders comes hither the determined bearer of words."
364:1 Indra's associates in arms, and musicians of his 
heaven.
Next: Canto XXXIII.: Lakshman's Entry.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIII.: LAKSHMAN'S ENTRY.
Through the fair city Lakshman came,
Invited in Sugríva's name.Within the gates the guardian bands,Of Vánars raised their suppliant hands,And in their ordered ranks, amazed,Upon the princely hero gazed,They marked each burning breath he drew,The fury of his soul they knew.Their hearts were chilled with sudden fear;They gazed, but dared not venture near,Before his eyes the city, gayWith gems and flowery gardens, lay,Where *fane and palace rose on high,And things of beauty charmed the eye.Where trees of every blossom grewYielding their fruit in season dueTo Vánars of celestial seedWho wore each varied form at need,Fair-faced and glorious with the shineOf heavenly robes and wreaths divine.There sandal, aloe, lotus bloomed,And there delicious breath perfumedThe city's broad street, redolentDf sugary mead 
1b and honey scent.

There many a lofty palace rose
Like Vindhya or the Lord of Snows,And with sweet murmur sparkling rillsLeapt lightly down the sheltering hills.On many a glorious palace, raisedFor prince and noble, 
2b Lakshman gazed:
Like clouds of paly hue they shoneWith fragrant wreaths that hung thereon:There wealth of jewels was enshrined,And fairer gems of womankind.There gleamed, of noble height and size,Like Indra's mansion in the skies,Protected by a crystal fenceOf rock, the royal residence,With roof and turret high and brightLike Mount Kailása's loftiest height.There blooming trees, Mahendra's gift,High o'er the walls were seen to liftTheir golden fruited boughs, that madeWith leaf and flower delicious shade.He saw a band of Vánars wait,
p. 365
Wieiding their weapons, at the gateWhere golden portals flashed betweenCelestial garlands red and green.Within Sugriva's fair abodeUnchecked the mighty hero strode,

As when the sun of autumn shrouds
His glory in a pile of clouds.Through seven wide courts he quickly passed,And reached the royal tower at last,Where seats were set with couch and bedOf gold and silver richly spread.While the young chieftain's feet drew nearThe sound of music reached his ear,As the soft breathings of the fluteCame blending with the voice and lute.Then beauty showed her youth and graceAnd varied charm of form and face:Soft bright-eyed creatures, fair and young,--Gay garlands round their necks were hung,And greater charms to each were lentBy richest dress and ornament.He saw the calm attendants waitAbout their lord in careless state,Heard women's girdles chime in sweetAccordance with their tinkling feet.He heard the anklet's silvery sound,He saw the calm that reigned around,And o'er him, as he listened, cameA rush of rage, a flood of shame.He drew his bowstring: with the clangFrom ease to west the welkin rang:Then in his modest mood withdrewA little from the ladies' view.And sternly silent stood apart.

While wrath for Ráma filled his heart.
Sugriva knew the sounding string,And at the call the Vánar kingSprang swiftly from his golden seat,And feared the coming prince to meet.Then with cold lips that terror driedTo beauteous Tárá thus he cried:'What cause of anger, O my spouseFair with the charm of lovely brows,Sets Lakshman's gentle breast on fire,And brings him in unwonted ire?Say, canst thou see, O faultless dame,A cause to till his soul with flame?For there must be a reason whenSuch fury stirs the king of men.Reveal the sin, if sin of mineAnger the lord of Raghu's line.Or go thyself, his rage subdue,And with soft words his favour woo.Soon as on thee his eyes are setHis heart this anger will forget,For men like him of lofty mindAre never stern with womankind.First let thy gentle speech disarmHis fury, and his spirit charm,
And I, from fear of peril free,
The conqueror of his foes will see.'   She heard: with faltering steps and slow,

With eyes that shone with trembling glow.
With gold-girt body gently bentTo meet the stranger prince she went.When Lakshman saw the Vánar queenWith tranquil eyes and modest mien,Before the dame he bent his head,And anger, at her presence, fled.Made bold by draughts of wine, and cheeredBy Lakshman look no more she feared,And in the trust his favour lentShe thus addressed him eloquent:'Whence springs thy burning fury? say;Who dares thy will to disobey?Who checks the maddened flames that seizeOn forests full of withered trees?  Then Lakshman spoke, her mind to ease,His kind reply in words like these:  'Thy lord his days in pleasure spends,Heedless of duty and of friends.Nor dost thou mark, though fondly true,The evil path his steps pursue.He cares not for affairs of state,Nor us forlorn and desolate,But sits a mere spectator still,A sensual slave to pleasure's will.Four months were fixed, the time agreedWhen he should help us in our need:But, bound in toils of pleasure fast,He sees not that the months are past.

Where beats the heart which draughts of wine
To virtue or to gain incline?Hast thou nor heard those draughts destroyVirtue and gain and love and joy?For those who, helped at need, refuseTheir aid in turn, their virtue lose:And they who scorn a friend disdainA treasure naught may buy again.Thy lord has cast his friend away,Nor feared from virtue's path to stray.If this he true, declare, O dameWho knowest duty's every claim.What further work remains for usDeceived and disappointed thus.'   She listened, for his words were kind.Where virtue showed with gain combined,And thus in turn the prince addressed,As hope was rising in his breast:'No time, no cause of wrath I seeWith those who live and honour thee:And thou shouldst bear without offenceThy servant's fitful negligence.I know the seasons glide away,While Ráma maddens at delayI know what deed our thanks has earned,I know that grace shonld be returnedBut still I know, whatever befall,That conquering love is lord of all;

p. 366
Know where Sugríva's thoughts, possessed
By one absorbing passion, rest.But he whom sensual joys debaseHeeds not the claim of time and place,And sees not with his blinded sightHis duty or his gain aright.O pardon him who loves me! spareThe Vánar caught in pleasure's snare,And once again let Ráma graceWith favour him who rules our race.E'en royal saints, whose chief delightWas penance and austerest rite,At love's commandment have unbent,Beguiled by sweetest blandishment.And know, Sugríva, roused at last,The order to his lords has passed.And, long by love and bliss delayed.Wakes all on fire your hopes to aid.A countless host his city fills,New-gathered from a thousand hills:Impetuous chiefs, who wear at needEach varied form, his legions lead.Come then, O hero, kept aloofBy modest awe, nor fear reproof:A faithful friend untouched by blameMay look upon another's dame.'   He passed within, by Tárá pressed,

And by his own impatient breast.
Refulgent there in sunlike sheenSugríva on his throne was seen.Gay garlands round his neck were twined,And Rumá by her lord recline.
Footnotes
364:1b Maireya, a spirituous liquor from the blossoms 
of the Lythrum fruticosum, with sugar, &c.
364:2b Their names are as follows: Angad, Mainda, Dwida, Gavaya, Gaváksha, Gaja, Sarabha, Vidyunmáli, 
Sampáti, Súryáksa, Hanumán, Virabáhu, Subáha, Nala, Kúmuda, Sushena, Tára, Jámbuvatu, Dadhivakra, *Nila, S'upátala, and Sunetra.
Next: Canto XXXIV.: Lakshman's Speech

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIV.: LAKSHMAN'S SPEECH
Sugríva started from his rest
With doubt and terror in his breast.He heard the prince's furious treadHe saw his eyes glow fiercely red.Swift sprang the monarch to his feetUpstarting from his golden seat.Rose Rumá and her fellows, too,And closely round Sugríva drew,As round the moon's full glory standAttendant stars in glittering band.Sugríva glanced with reddened eyes,Raised his joined hands in suppliant guiseFlew to the door, and rooted thereStood like the tree that grants each prayer. 
1
And Lakshman saw, and, fiercely moved,With angry speech the king reproved:
'Famed is the prince who loves the truth,
Whose soul is touched with tender ruth,Who, liberal, keeps each sense subdued,And pays the debt of gratitude.but all unmeet a king to be,The meanest of the mean is he

Who basely breaks the promise made
To trusting friends who lent him aid.He sins who for a steed has lied,As if a hundred steeds had died:Or if he lie, a cow to win,Tenfold as heavy is the sin.But if the lie a man betray,Both he and his shall all decay. 
1b
O Vánar King, the thankless manIs worthy of the general ban.Who takes assistance of his friends,And in his turn no service lends.This verse of old by Brahmá sungIs echoed now by every tongue.Hear what He cried in angry moodBewailing man's ingratitude:'For draughts of wine for slaughtered cows,For treacherous theft, for broken vowsA pardon is ordained: but noneFor thankless scorn of service done.'Ungrateful, Vánar King, art thou,And faithless to thy plighted vow.For Ráma brought thee help, and yetThou shunnest to repay the debt:Or, grateful, thou hadst surely pressedTo aid the hero in his quest.Thou art, in vulgar pleasures drowned,False to thy bond in honour bound.Nor yet has Ráma's guileless heart

Discerned thee for the thing thou art--
A snake who holds the frogs that criesAnd lures fresh victims as it dies.Brave Ráma, born for glorious fate,Has set thee in thy high estate,And to the Vánars' throne restored,Great-souled himself, their mean-souled lord.Now if thy pride disown what he,High thoughted prince, has done for thee,Struck by his arrows shalt thou fall,And Báli meet in Yama's hall.Still open, to the gloomy God,Lies the sad path thy brother trod.Then to thy plighted word be true,Nor let thy steps that path pursue.Me thinks the shafts of Ráma, shotLike thunderbolts, thou heedest not,Who canst, absorbed in sensual bliss,Thy promise from thy mind dismiss.'
p. 367
Footnotes
366:1 The Kalpadruma or Wishing-tree is one of the 
trees of Svarga or Indra's Paradise: it has the power of 
granting all desires.

366:1b The meaning is that if a man promises to give a 
horse and then breaks his word he commits a sin as 
great as if he had killed a hundred horses.
Next: Canto XXXV.: Tárá's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXV.: TÁRÁ'S SPEECH.
He ceased: and Tárá starry-eyed
Thus to the angry prince replied:'Not to my lord shouldst thou addressA speech so fraught with bitterness:Not thus reproached my lord should be,And least of all, O Prince, by thee.He is no thankless coward--no--With spirit dead to valour's glow.From paths of truth he never strays,Nor wanders in forbidden ways.Ne'er will Sugríva's heart forget,By Ráma saved, the lasting debt.Still in his grateful breast will liveThe succour none but he could give.Restored to fame by Ráma's grace,To empire o'er the Vánar race,From ceaseless dread and toil set free,Restored to Rumá and to me:By grief and care and exile tried,New to the bliss so long denied,Like Visvámitra once, alas,He marks not how the seasons pass.That saint ten thousand years remained,By sweet Ghritáchís  
1 love enchained,

And deemed those years, that flew away
So lightly, but a single day.O, if those years unheeded flewBy him who times and seasons knew,Unequalled for his lofty mind.What marvel meaner eyes are blind?Then be not angry, Raghu's son,And let thy brother feel for oneWho many a weary year has spentStranger to love and blandishment.Let not this wrath thy soul inflame,Like some mean wretch unknown to fame:For high and noble hearts like thineLove mercy and to truth incline,Calm and deliberate, and slowWith anger's raging fire to glow.At length, O righteous prince, relent,Nor let my words in vain be spent.This sudden blaze of fury slake,I pray thee for Sugríva's sake.He would renounce at Ráma's callRumá and Angad, me and allWho call him lord: his gold and grain,The favour of his friend to gain.His arm shall slay the fiend more baseIn soul than all his impious race,And happy Ráma reuniteTo Sitá, rival in delight

Of the triumphant Moon when he
Rejoins his darling Rohiní.  1b
Ten million million demons guardThe gates of Lanká firmly barred.All hope until that host be slain,To smite the robber king is vain.Nor with Sugríva's aid aloneMay king and host be overthrown.Thus ere he died--for well he knew--Spake Báli, and his words are true.I know not what his proofs might be,But speak the words he spake to me.Hence far and wide our lords are sentTo raise the mightiest armament.For their return Sugríva waitsEre he can sally from his gates.Still is the oath Sugríva sworeKept firmly even as before:And the great host this day will beAssembled by the king's decree,Ten thousand thousand troops, who wearThe form of monkey and of bear,Prepared for thee the war to wage:Then let thy wrath no longer rage.The matrons of the Vánar raceSee marks of fury in thy face;They see thine eyes like blood are red,And will not yet be comforted.'

Footnotes
367:1 The story is told in Book 1. Canto LXIII., but the 
charmer there is called Menaká.
Next: Canto XXXVI.: Sugríva's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVI.: SUGRÍVA'S SPEECH.
She ceased: and Lakshman gave assent,
Won by her gentle argument.So Tárá's pleading, just and mild,His softening heart had reconciled.His altered mood Sugríva saw,And cast aside the fear and aweLike raiment heavy with the rainWhich on his troubled soul had lain.Then quickly to the ground he threwHis flowery garland, bright of hue,Which round his royal neck he wore,And, sobered, was himself once more.Then turning to the princely manIn soothing words the king began:'My glory, wealth, and royal swayTo other hands had passed away:But Ráma to my rescue came,And gave me back my power and fame.O Lakshman, say, whose grateful heart
p. 368
Could nurse the hope to pay in part,By service of a life, the deed

Of Ráma sprung of heavenly seed?
His foeman Rávan shall be slain,And Sítá shall be his again.The hero's side I will not leave,But he the conquest shall achieve.What need of help has he who drewHis bow, and one great arrow flewTrough seven tall trees, a mountain rent,And cleft the earth with force unspent?What aid needs he who shook his bow,And at the sound the earth belowWith hill and wood and rooted rockQuaked feverous with the thunder shock?Yet all my legions will I bring.And follow close the warrior kingMarching on his impetuous wayFierce Rávan and his hosts to slay.If I be guilty of offence,Careless through love or negligence,Let him his loyal slave forgive;For error cleaves to all who live.'   Thus king Sugriva, good and brave,In humble words his answer gave,Softened was Lakshman's angry moodWho thus his friendly speech renewed:'My brother, Vánar King, will seeA champion and a friend in thee.So strong art thou, so brave and bold,So pure in thought, so humble-souled,

That thou deservest well to reign
And all a monarch's bliss to gain.Lend thou my brother aid, and allHis foes beneath his arm will fall.Full well the words thou speakest suitA chieftain wise and resolute.With grateful heart that loves the right,And foot that never yields in tight.O come, and my sad brother cheerWho mourns the wife he holds so dear.O pardon, friend, my harsh address,And Ráma's frantic bitterness.'
Footnotes
367:1b Rohiní is the name of the ninth Nakshatra or 
lunar asterism personified as a daughter of Daksha, and 
the favourite wife of the Moon. 
    Aldebaran is the principal star in the constellation.
Next: Canto XXXVII.: The Gathering.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVII.: THE GATHERING.
He ceased: and King Sugriva cried
To sage Hanúmán  1 by his side:
'Summon the Vánar legions, thoseWho dwell about the Lord of Snows:Those who in Vindhyan groves delight,Kailása's, or Mahendra's height,Dwell on the Five bright Peaks, or whereMandar's white summit cleaves the air:
Wherever they are wandring free
In highlands by the western sea,On that east hill whence springs the sun,Or where he sinks when day is done.Call the great chiefs whose legions tillThe forests of the Lotus Hill,  
1b
Where every one in strength and sizeWith the stupendous Anjan  
2b vies.
Call those, with tints ot burnished goldWhom Mahás'aila's caverns hold:Those who on Dhúnira roam, or hideIn the wild woods on Meru's side.Call those who, brilliant as the sun,On high Mahárun leap and run,

Quaffing sweet juices that distil
From odorous trees upon the hill,Call those whom tranquil haunts delightWhere dwell the sage and anchoriteIn groves that through their wide extentExhale a thousand blossoms' scent.Send out, send out: from coast to coastAssemble all the Vánar host:With force, with words, with gifts of priceCompel, admonish and entice.Already envoys have been sentTo warn them of their lord's intent.Let others urged by thee repeatMy mandate that their steps be fleet.Those lords who yielding to the swayOf love's delight would fain delay,Urge hither with the utmost speed,Or with thee to my presence lead:And those who linger to the lastUntil ten days be come and passed,And dare their sovereign to defy.For their offence shall surely die.Thousands, yea millions, shall there be,Obedient to their king's decree,The lions of the Vánar race,Assembled from each distant place.Forth shall they haste like hills in size,Or mighty clouds that veil the skies,And swiftly speeding on their way

Bring all our legions in array.'
p. 369
He ceased: the son of Váyu  1 heard,
Submissive to his sovereign's word;
And sent his rapid envoys forthTo east and west and south and north.They bent their airy course afarAlong the paths of bird and star,And sped through ether farther yetWhere Vishnu's splendid sphere is set. 
2
By sea, on hill, by wood and lakeThey called to arms for Ráma's sake,As each with terror in his breastObeyed his awful king's behest.Three million Vánars, fierce and strongAs Anjan's self, a wondrous throng.Sped from the spot where Ráma stillGazed restless from the woody hill.Ten million others, brave and bold,With coats that shone like burning gold,Came flying from the mountain crestWhere sinks the weary sun to rest.Impetuous from the northern skies,Wnere Mount Kailása's summits rise,Ten hundred millions hasted, huedLike manes of lions, ne'er subdued:The dwellers on Himálaya's side,

Whose food his roots and fruit supplied,
With rangers of the Vindhyan chainAnd neighbours of the Milky Main.  
3
Some from the palm groves where they fed,Some from the woods of betel sped:In countless numbers, fierce and brave,They came from mountain, lake, and cave.   As on their way the Vánars wentTo rouse each distant armament,They chanced that wondrous tree to viewThat on Himálaya's summit grew.Of old upon that sacred heightWas wrought Mahes'var's  
4 glorious rite,
Which every God in heaven beheld,And his glad heart with triumph swelled.There from pure seed at random sownBright plants with luscious fruit had grown,And, sweet as Amrit to the taste,The summit of the mountain graced.Who once should eat the virtuous fruitThat sprang from so divine a root,One whole revolving moon should beFrom every pang of hunger free.
The Vánars culled the fruit they found
Ripe on the sacrificial groundWith rare celestial odours sweet,To lay them at Sugríva's feet.Those noble envoys scoured the land

To summon every Vánar band
Then swiftly homeward at the headOf countless armaments they sped.They gathered by Kishkindhá's wall.They thronged Sugríva's palace hall,And, richly laden, bare withinThat fruit of heavenly origin.Their gifts before their king they spread,And thus in tones of triumph said:'Through every land our way we tookTo visit hill and wood and brook,And all thy hosts from east to westFlock hither at their lord's behest.'Sugríva with delighted lookThe present of his envoys took.Then bade them go, with gracious speechRewarding and dismissing each.
Footnotes
368:1 Válmíki and succeeding poets make the second 
vowel in this name long or Short at their pleasure.
368:1b Some of the mountains here mentioned are fabulous and others it is impossible to identify. Sugríva 
means to include all the mountains of India from Kailás 

the residence of the God Kuvera, regarded as one of the 
loftiest peaks of the Himálayas, to Mabendra in the extreme south, from the mountain in the east where the sun is said to rise to Astáchal or the western mountain where he sets. The commentators give little assistance: that Mahás'aila, &c. are certain mountains is about all the information they give.
368:2b One of the celestial elephants of the Gods who 
protect the four quarters and intermediate points of the 
compass.
369:1 Va'yu or the Wind was the father of Hanumán.
369:2 The path or station of Vishnu is the space 
between the seven Risbis or Ursa Major, and Dhruva or 
the polar star.
369:3 One of the seven seas which surround the earth in 
concentric circles.
369:4 The title of Mahes'var * or Mighty Lord is sometimes given to Indra, but more generally to S'iva 
whom it here denotes.
Next: Canto XXXVIII.: Sugríva's Departure.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVIII.: SUGRÍVA'S 
DEPARTURE.
Thus all the princely Vánars, true
To their appointed tasks, withdrew.Suigríva deemed already doneThe work he planned for Raghu's son.Then Lakshman gently spoke and cheeredSugríva for his valour feared:' Now, chieftain, if thy will be so.Forth from Kishkindhá let us go.'Sugríva's heart swelled high with prideAs to the prince he thus replied:'Come, speed we forth without delay:'Tis mine thy mandate to obey.'Sugríva bade the dames adieu,And Tárá and the rest withdrew.Then at their chieftain's summons cameThe Vánars first in rank and fame,A trusty brave and reverent band,Meet e'en before a queen to stand.They at his call made haste to bringThe litter of the glorious king.' Mount, O my friend.' Sugríva cried,And straight Sumitrá's son complied.

Then took by Lakshman's side his place
The sovereign of the woodland race,Upraised by Vánars, fleet and strong.Who bore the glittering load along.On high above his royal headA paly canopy was spread,And chouries white in many a handThe forehead of the monarch fanned,And shell and drum and song and shoutPealed round him as the king passed out.
p. 370
About the monarch went a throngOf Vánar warriors brave and strong,As onward to the mountain shadeWhere Ráma dwelt his way he made.Soon as the lovely spot he viewedWhere Ráma lived in solitude,The Vánar monarch, far-renowed,With Lakshman, lightly stepped to ground,And to the son of Raghu wentJoining his raised hands reverent.As their great leader raised his hands,So suppliant stood the Vánar bands.Well pleased the son of Raghu sawThose legions, hushed in reverent awe,Stand silent like the tranquil floodsThat raise their hands of lotus buds.

But Ráma, when the king, to greet
His friend, had bowed him at his feet,Raised him who ruled the Vanar race,And held him in a close embrace:Then, when his arms he had unknit,Besought him by his side to sit,And thus with gentle words the bestOf men the Vánar king addressed:   'The prince who well his days divides,And knows aright the times and tidesTo follow duty, joy, or gain,He, only he, deserves to reign.But he who wealth and virtue leaves,And every hour to pleasure cleaves,False from his bliss like him who wakesFrom slumber on a branch that breaks.True king is he who smites his foes,And favour to his servants shows,And of that fruit makes timely useWhich virtue, wealth, and joy produce.The hour is come that bids thee riseTo aid me in my enterprise.Then call thy nobles to debate,And with their help deliberate.'   'Lost was my power,' the king replied,'All strength had fled, all hope had diedThe Vánars owned another lord,But by thy grace was all restored.All this, O conqueror of the foe,

To thee and Lakshman's aid I owe
And his should be the villain's shameWho durst deny the sacred claim.These Vánar chiefs of noblest birthHave at my bidding roamed the earth,And brought from distant regions allOur legions at their monarch's call:Fierce bears with monkey troops combined,And apes of every varied kind,Terrific in their forms, who dwellIn grove and wood and bosky dell:The bright Gaudharvas' brood, the seedOf Gods, 
1 they change their shapes at need.
Each with his legions in array,Hither, O Prince, they make their way,They come: and tens of millions swellTo numbers that no tongue may tell. 
1b
For thee their armies will uniteWith chiefs, Mahendra's peers in might.From Meru and from Vindhya's chainThey come like clouds that bring the rain.These round thee to the war will go,To smite to earth thy demon foe;Will slay the Rákshas and restoreThy consort when the fight is o'er."

Footnotes
370:1 See Book I. Canto XVI.
Next: Canto XXXIX.: The Vánar Host.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIX.: THE VÁNAR HOST.
Then Ráma, best of all who guide
Their steps by duty, thus replied:'What marvel if Lord Indra sendThe kindly rain, O faithful friend?If, thousand-rayed, the God of DayDrive every darksome cloud away?Or, rising high, the Lord of NightFlood the broad heaven with silver light?What marvel, King, that one like theeThe glory of his friends.should be?No marvel, O my lord, that thouHast shown thy noble nature now.Thy heart, Sugriva, well I know:Naught from thy lips but truth may flow,With thee for friend and champion allMy foes beneath my arm will fall.The Rákshas, when my queen he stole,Brought sure destruction on his soul,Like Anuhláda  
2b who beguiled
Queen Sachí called Puloma's child.Yes, near, Sugriva, is the dayWhen I my demon foe shall slay,As conquering Indra in his ire

Slew Queen Paulomi's haughty sire.' 3b
p. 371
   He ceased: thick clouds of dust rose high
To every quarter of the sky:The very sun grew faint and paleBehind the darkly-gathering veil.The mighty clouds that hung o'erheadFrom east to west thick darkness spread,And earth to her foundations shookWith hill and forest, lake and brook.Then hidden was the ground beneathFierce warriors armed with fearful teeth,Hosts numberless, each lord in sizeA match for him who rules the skies:From many a sea and distant hill,From rock and river, lake and rill.Some like the morning sun were bright.Some, like the moon, were silver white:These green as lotus fibres, thoseWhite-coated from their native snows. 
1
Then S'atabali came in viewGirt by a countless retinue.Like some gold mountain high in airTárá's illustrious sire 
2 was there.
There Rumá's father, 3 far-renowned,
With tens of thousands ranged around.There, tinted like the tender green

Of lotus filaments, was seen,
Compassed by countless legions, oneWhose face was as the morning sun,Hanúmán's father good and great,Kesarí, 
4 wisest in debate.
There the proud king Gaváksha, fearedFor his strong warrior arm, appeared.There Dhúmra, mighty lord, the dreadOf foes, his ursine legions led.There Panas, first for warlike fame,With twenty million warriors came.There glorious Níla, dark of hue,Arrayed his countless troops in view.There moved lord Gavaya brave and bold,Resplendent like a hill of gold,And near him Darímukha stoodWith millions from the hill and woodAnd *Dwivid famed for strength and speed,And Mamda, both of Asvin seed.There Gaja, strong and glorious, ledThe countless troops around him spread,And Jámbaván 
5 the king whose sway
The bears delighted to obey,
With swarming myriads onward pressed
True to his lord Sugríva's hest;And princely Ruman, dear to fame,Led millions whom no hosts could tame,All these and many a chief beside 
1b

Came onward fierce in warlike pride.
They covered all the plain, and stillPressed forward over wood and hill.In rows for many a league aroundThey rested on the grassy ground;Or to Sugríva made their way.Like clouds about the Lord of Day,And to the king their proud heads bentIn power and might preeminent.Sugríva then to Ráma sped.And raised his reverent hands, and saidThat every chief from coast to coastWas present with his warrior host.
Footnotes
370:1b The numbers are unmanageable in English 
verse. The poet speaks of hundreds of arbudas; and an 
arbuda is a hundred millions.
370:2b Anuhláda or Anuhráda is one of the four sons of 
the mighty Hiranyakasipu, an Asur or a Daitya son of 
Kasyapa and Diti and killed by Vishnu in his incarnation of the Man-Lion Narasinha. According to the Bhágavata Purána the Daitya or Asur Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyáksha his brother, both killed by Vishnu, 

were born again as Rávan and Kumbhakarna his 
brother.'
370:3b Putoma, a demon, was the father-in-law of Indra 
who destroyed him in order to avert an imprecation. 
Paulomit is a patronymic denoting Sachi the daughter of Puloma.
371:1 "Observe the variety of colours which the poem 
attributes to all these inhabitants of the different 
mountainous regions, some white, others yellow, &c. Such dif- ferent colours were perhaps peculiar and distinctive characteristics of those various races." GORRESSIO.
371:2 Sushen.
371:3 Tara.
371:4 Kesari was the husband of Hanumnán's mother, 
and is here called his father.
371:5 "I here unite under one heading two animals of p. 
372 but which from some gross resemblances, probably 
helped by an equivoque in the language, are closely 
affiliated in the Hindoo myth.....a reddish colour of the skin, want of symmetry and ungainliness of form, strength in hugging with the fore paws or arms, the 

faculty of climbing, shortness of tail(?), sensuality, 
capacity of instruction in dancing and in music, are all characteristics which more or less distinguish and meet in bears as well as in monkeys In the Rámáyanam, the wise Jámnavant, the Odysseus of the expedition of Lanká, is called now king of the bears (rikshaparthivah), now great monkey (Mahákapih). DeGubernatis: Zoological Mythology, Vol. II. p. 97.
Next: Canto XL.: The Army of The East.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XL.: THE ARMY OF THE EAST.
With practiced eye the king reviewed
The Vánars' counties multitude,And, joying that his hest was done,Thus spake to Raghu's mighty son:'See, all the Vánar hosts who fearMy sovereign might are gathered here.Chiefs strong as Indra's self, who speedWher'er they list, these armies lead.Fierce and terrific to the viewAs Daityas or the Dánav 
2b crew,
p. 372
Famed in all lands for souls afireWith lofty thoughts, they never tire,O'er hill and vale they wander free,And islets of the distant sea.And these gathered myriads, allWill serve thee, Ráma, at thy call.Whate'er thy heart advises, say:Thy mandates will the host obey.'   Then answered Ráma, as he pressedThe Vánar monarch to his breast:'O search for my lost Sítá, strive

To find her if she still survive:
And in thy wondrous wisdom traceFierce Rávan to his dwelling-place.And when by toil and search we knowWhere Sítá lies and where the foe,With thee, dear friend, will I deviseFit means to end the enterprise.Not mine, not Lakshman's is the powerTo guide us in the doubtful hour.Thou, sovereign of the *Vanars, thouMust be our hope and leader now.'   He ceased: at King Sugríva's callNear came a Vánar strong and tall.Huge as a towering mountain, loudAs some tremendous thunder cloud,A prince who warlike legions led:To him his sovereign turned and said:'Go, take ten thousand  
1 of our race
Well trained in lore of time and place,And search the eastern region; throughGroves, woods, and hills thy way pursue,There seek for Sítá, trace the spotWhere Rávan hides, and weary not.Search for the captive in the cavesOf mountains, and by woods and waves.To Surjú, 
2 Kauá*ikí, 3 repair,
Bhagírath's daughter 4 fresh and fair.
Search mighty *Yámun's 5 peak, explore
Swift Yamu*ná's 6 delightful shore,

Sarasvati 7 and Sindhu's 8 tide,
And rapid S'ona's 1b pebbly side.
Then roam afar by Mahí's 2b bed
Where Kálamahí's groves are spread.
Go where the silken tissue shines,Go to the land of silver mines. 
3b
Visit each isle and mountain steepAnd city circled by the deep,And distant villages that highAbout the peaks of Mandar lie.Speed over Yavadwipa's land, 
4b
And see Mount S'is'ir 5b proudly stand
Uplifting to the skies his headBy Gods and Dánavs visited.Search each ravine and mountain pass,Each tangled thicket deep in grass.Search every cave with utmost careIf haply Ráma's queen be there.Then pass beyond the sounding seaWhere heavenly beings wander free,And S'ona's 
6b waters swift and strong
With ruddy billows foam along.Search where his shelving banks descend,Search where the hanging woods extendTry if the pathless thickets screenThe robber and the captive queen.Search where the torrent floods that rend

The mountain to the plains descend:
Search dark abysses where they rave,Search mountain slope and wood and caveThen on with rapid feet and gainThe inlands of the fearful mainWhere, tortured by the tempest's lash,Against rude rocks the billows d*ash:An ocean like a sable cloud,Whose margent monstrous serpents crowd;
p. 373
An ocean rising with a roarTo beat upon an iron shore.On, onward still! your feet shall treadShores of the sea whose waves are red,Where spreading wide your eyes shall seeThe guilt-tormenting cotton tree  
1
And the wild spot where Garud  2 dwells
Which gems adorn and ocean shells,High as Kallása, nobly decked,Wrought by the heavenly architect.  
3
Hnge giants named Mandehas  4 there
In each foul shape they love to wear,Numbing the soul with terror's chill,Hang from the summit of the hill.When darts the sun his earliest beamThey plunge them in the ocean stream,New vigour from his rays obtain,

And hang upon the rocks again
Speed onward still: your steps shall beAt length beside the Milky SeaWhose everv ripple as it curlsGleams glorious with its wealth of pearls.Amid that sea like pale clouds spreadThe white Mount Rishabh  
5 rears his head.
About the mountain's glorious waistWoods redolent of bloom are braced.A lake where lotuses unfoldTheir silver buds with threads of gold,Sudar*s'an ever bright and fairWhere white swans sport, lies gleaming there,The wandering Kinnar's  
6 dear resort,
Where heavenly nymphs and Yakshas  7 sport.
On! leave the Milky Sea behind:Another flood your search shall find,A waste of waters, wild and drear.That chills each living heart with fear.There see the horse's awful head,Wrath-born, that flames in Ocean's bed. 
1b
There rises up a fearful cryFrom the sea things that move thereby,When, helpless, powerless for flight,They gaze upon the horrid sight.Past to the northern shore, and thenBeyond the flood three leagues and tenYour wondering glances will behold

Mount Játarúpa  2b bright with gold.
There like the young moon pale of hue
The monstrous serpent  3b will ye view,
The earth's supporter, whose bright eyesResemble lotus leaves in size.He rests upon the mountain's brow,And all the Gods before him bow.Ananta with a thousand headsHis length in robes of azure spreads.A triple-headed palm of gold--Meet standard for the lofty-souled--Springs towering from the mountain's crestBeneath whose shade he loves to rest,So that in eastern realms each GodMay use it as a measuring-rod.Beyond, with burning gold aglow,The eastern steep his peaks will show,Which in unrivalled glory riseA hundred leagues to pierce the skies,And all the neighbouring air is brightWith golden trees that clothe the height.A lofty peak uprises thereTen leagues in height and one league square*Saumanas*, wrought of glistering gold,Ne'er to be loosened from its hold.There his first step Lord Vishnu placedWhen through the universe he paced,And with his second lightly pressedThe loftiest peak of Meru's crest.

When north of Jambudwíp  4b the sun
p. 374
A portion of his course has run.
And hangs above this mountain height,Then creatures see the genial light.Vaikhánases, 
1 saints far renowned,
And Bálaklulvas, 2 love the ground
Where in their glory half divine.Touched by the morning glow, they shineThe light that flashes from that steepIllumines all Sudars'andwip, 
3
And on each creature, as it glows,The sight and strength of life bestows.Search well that mountain's woody sideIf Rávan there his captive hide.The rising sun, the golden hillThe air with growing splendours fill,Till flashes from the east the redOf morning with the light they shed.This, where the sun begins his state,Is earth and heaven's most eastern gate.Through all the mountain forest seekBy waterfall and cave and peak.Search every nook and bosky dell,If Rávan there with Sítá dwell.There, Vánars, there your steps must stay:No farther eastward can ye stray.

Beyond no sun, no moon given light,
But all is sunk in endless night.Thus far, O Vánar lords, may youO'er sea and land your search pursue.But wild and dark and known to noneIs the drear space beyond the sun.That mountain whence the sun ascendsYour long and weary journey ends. 
4
Now go, and in a month return,And let success my praises earn,He who beyond tho month shall stayWill with his life the forfeit pay.'
Footnotes
ÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌ1b:1b Gandhamádana, 
Angad, Tára, Indrajánu, Rambha, Durmukha, Hanumán, 
Nala, Da mukha, S'arabha, Kumuda, Vahni.
ÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌ2b:2b Daityas and Dánavas 
are fiends and enemies of the Gods, life the Titans of 
Greek mythology.
372:1 I reduce the unwieldy numbers of the original to 
more modest figures.

372:2 Sarayú now Sarjú is the river on which Ayodhyá 
was built.
372:3 Kaus'iki is a river which flows through Behar, commonly called Kosi.
372:4 Bhagirath's daughter is Ganga or the Ganges. The legend is told at length in Book I. Canto XLIV The 
Descent of Gangá.
372:5 A mountain not identified.
372:6 The Jumna. The river is personified as the twin 
sister of Yama, and hence regarded as the daughter of 
the Sun.
372:7 The Sarasvatí (corruptly called Sursooty, is 
supposed to join the Ganges and Jumna at Prayág or 
Allahabad. It rises in the mountains bounding the north-east part of the province of Delhi, and running in a south-westerly direction becomes lost in the sands of the great desert.
372:8 The Sindhu is the Indus, the Sanskrit s becoming 
h in Persian and being in this instance dropped by the 
Greeks.

372:1b The Sone which rises in the district of Nagpore 
and falls into the Ganges above Patna.
372:2b Mahi* is a river rising in Malwa and falling into the gulf of Cambay after a westerly course of 280 miles.
372:3b There is nothing to show what parts of the country the poet intended to denote as silk-producing 
and silver-producing.
372:4b Yavadwipa means the island of Yava, wherever 
that may be.
372:5b S'is'ir is said to be a mountain ridge projecting from the base of Meru on the south. WILSON'S Vishnu 
Purána, ed. Hall, Vol. II. p. 117.
372:6b This appears to be some mythical stream and not 
the well-known Sone. The name means red-coloured.
373:1 A fabulous thorny rod of the cotton tree used for torturing the wicked in hell. The tree gives its name, 
Sálmali, to one of the seven Dwípas, or great divisions of the known continent: and also to a hell where the wicked are tormented with the pickles of the tree.
373:2 The king of the feathered creation.

373:3 Vis´vakarmá, the Muleiher of the Indian heaven.
373:4 "The terrific fiends named Mandehas attempt to 
devour the sun: for Brahmá denounced this curse upon 
them, that without the power to perish they should die every day (and revive by night) and therefore a fierce contest occurs (daily) between them and the sun." 
WILSON'S Vishnu Purána. Vol.II. p. 250.
373:5 Said in the Vishnu Purána to be a ridge projecting 
from the base of Meru to the north.
373:6 Kinnars are centaurs reversed, beings with equine head and human bodies.
373:7 Yakshas are demi-gods attendant on "Ruyera"* the God of wealth.
373:1b Aurva was one of the descendants of Bhrigu From his wrath proceeded a flame that threatened to 
destroy the world, had not Aurva cast it into the ocean where it remained concealed, and having the face of a horse. The legend is told in the Mahábharat. I. 6*3*02.
373:2b The word Játarupa means gold.

373:3b The celebrated mythological serpent king Sesha, 
called also Ananta or the infinite, represented as bearing 
the earth on one of his thousand heads.
373:4b Jambudwípa is in the centre of the seven great 
dwípas or continents into which the world is divided, 
and in the centre of Jambudwípa is the golden p. 374 
mountain Meru 84,000 yojans high, and crowned by the great city of Brahmá, Sse WILSON'S Vishnu Purána, Vol II, p. 110.
374:1 Vaikhánases are a race of hermit saints said to 
have sprung from the nails of Prajápati.
374:2 "The wife of Eratu, Samnnti, brought forth the sixty thousand Válakhilyas, pigmy sages, no bigger than 
a joint of the thumb, chaste, pious, resplendent as the rays of the Sun" WlLSOK'S Vishnu Purána.
374:3 The continent in which Sudarsan or Meru stands, 
i. e. Jambudwip.
374:4 The names of some historical peoples which occur in this Canto and in the Cantos describing the 
south and north will he found in the ADDITIONAL NOTES. They are bare lists, not susceptible of a metrical version.

Next: Canto XLI.: The Army of The South.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLI.: THE ARMY OF THE SOUTH.
He gathered next a chosen band
For service in the southern land.He summoned Níla son of Fire,And, offspring of the eternal Sire,Jámbaván bold and strong and tall.And Hanumán, the best of all,And many a valiant lord beside, 
1b
With Angad for their chief and guide.'Go forth,' he cried, 'with all this hostExploring to the southern coast:The thousand peaks that Vindhya showsWhere every tree and creeper grows:Where Narmadá's  
2b sweet waters run,
And serpents bask them in the sun:Where Krishnavení, 
3b currents flee,
And sparkles fair Godávaií. 4b
Through Mekhal, 5b pass and Utkal's, 6b land:
Go where Das'árna's, 7b cities stand.
Avantí, 8b seek, of high renown,
And Abravanti's, 9b glorious town.
Search every hill and brook and caveWhere Dandak's woods their branches wave

Avomukh's, 10b woody hill explore
Whose sides are bright with richest ore,.
lifting his glorious head on highFrom bloomy groves that round him lie.
p. 375
Search well his forests where the breezeBlows fragrant from the sandal trees.Then will you see Káverí's 
1 stream
Whose pleasant waters glance and gleam,And to the lovely banks enticeThe sportive maids of Paradise.High on the top of Malaya's 
2 hill,
In holy musing, calm and still,Sits, radiant as the Lord of Light,Agastya, 
3 noblest anchorite.
Soon as that lofty-thoughted lordHis high permission shall accord,Pass Támraparní's 
4 flood whose isles
Are loved by basking crocodiles.The sandal woods that fringe her sideThose islets and her waters hide;While, like an amorous matron, sheSpeeds to her own dear lord the sea.Thence hasting on your way beholdThe Pándyas' 
5 gates of pearl and gold.
Then, with your task maturely planned,On ocean's shore your feet will stand.

Where, by Agastya's high decree,
Mahendra, 6 planted in the sea,
With tinted peaks against the tideRises in solitary pride,And glorious in his golden glowSpurns back the waves that beat below.Fair mountain, bright with creepers' bloomAnd every tint that trees assume,Where Yaksha, God, and heavenly maidMeet wandering in the lovely shade,At changing moon and solemn tideBy Indra's presence glorified.One hundred leagues in fair extentAn island 
7 fronts the continent:
No man may tread its glitering shoreWith utmost heed that isle explore,For the fair country owns the swayOf Rávan whom we burn to day.
A mighty monster stands to keep
The passage of the southern deep,Lifting her awful arms on highShe grasps e'en shadows as they fly.Speed through that isle, and onward stillWhere in mid sea the Flowery Hill 
1b
Haises on high his bloomy headBy saints and angels visited.There, with a hundred gleaming peaksBright as the sun, the sky he seeks,

One glorious peak the Lord of Day
Gilds ever with his loving ray;Thereon ne'er yet the glances fellOf thankless wretch or infidel.Bow to that hill in reverence due,And then once more your search pursue.Beyond that glorious mountain hie,And Súryaván, 
2b proud hill is nigh.
Your rapid course yet farther bendWhere Vaidyut's 
3b airy peaks ascend.
There trees of noblest sort, profuseOf wealth, their kindly gifts produce.Their precious fruits, O Vánars, taste,The honey sip, and onward haste.Next will ye see Mount Kunjar rise,Who cheers with beauty hearts and eyes.There is Agastya's 
4b mansion, decked
Bv heaven's all moulding architect.Near Bhogavatí 
5b stands, the place
Where dwell the hosts of serpent race:A broad-wayed city, walled and barred,Which watchful legions keep and guard,The fiercest of the serpent youth,Each awful for his venomed tooth:And throned in his imperial hallIs Vásuki 
6b who rules them all.
Explore the serpent city well,Search town and tower and citadel,And scan each field and wood that lies

Around it, with your watchful eyes.
Beyond that spot your way pursue:A noble mountain shall ye view,Named Rishabh, like a mighty bull,With gems made bright and beautiful.
p. 376
All trees of sandal flourish thereOf heavenly fragrance, rich and rare.But, though they tempt your longing eyes,Avoid to touch them, and be wise.For Rohitas, a guardian bandOf fierce Gandharvas, round them stand,Who five bright sovereign lords 
1 obey,
In glory like the God of Day.Here by good deeds a home is won.With shapes like fire, the moon, the sun.Here they who merit heaven by worthDwell on the confines of the earth.There stay; beyond it, dark and drear,Lies the departed spirits' sphere,And, girt with darkness, far from bliss,Is Yama's sad metropolis. 
2
So far, my lords, o'er land and seaVour destined course is plain and free.Beyond your steps you may not set,Where living thing ne'er journeyed yet.With utmost care these realms survey,

And all you meet upon the way.
And, when the lady's course is traced,Back to your king, O Vánars, haste.And he who tells me he has seen.After long search, the Maithil queen,Shall gain a noble guerdon: heIn power and bliss shall equal me.Dear as my very life, aboveHis fellows in his master's love;I call him, yea though stained with crime.My kinsman from that happy time.'
Footnotes
374:1b Suhotra, S'arári, S'aragulma, Gain, Gavák-ha, 
Gavaya, Sushena, Gandhamádana, Ulkámukha, and 
Ananga.
374:2b The modern Nerbudda.
374:3b Krishnavení is mentioned in the Vishnu Purnna 
as 'the deep Krishnaven' '* but there appears to be no 
clue to its identification.
374:4b The modern Godavery.

374:5b The Mekbaias or Mekalas according to the 
Patánas live in the Vindhya hills, but here they appear 
among the peoples of the south.
374:6b Utkal is still the native nameof Oriss*.
374:7b The land of the people of the 'ten forts.' 
Professor Hall in a note on WlL.- SONS Vishnu 
Purana, Vol. II. p.160 says: "The oral traditions of the vicinity to this day assign the nameof Dasarna to a region lying to the east of the District of Cbundeyree."
374:8b Avantí is one of the ancient names of the 
celebrated Ujjayin or Oujein in Central India.
374:9b Not identified
374:10b Ayemukh means iron faced. The mountun is not identified.
375:1 The Káverí or modern Cauvery is well known and has always borne the same appellation, being the 
Chaberis of Ptolemy.
375:2 One of the seven principal mountain chains: the 
southern portion of the Western Gháts.

375:3 Agastya is the great sage who has already 
frequently appeared as Ráma's friend and benefactor.
375:4 Támraparni is a river rising in Malaya.
375:5 The Pándyas are a people of the Decean.
375:6 Mahendra is the chain of hills that extends from Orissa and the northern Sircars to Gondwána, part of 
which near Ganjam is still called Mahendra Malay or hills of Mahendra.
375:7 Lanká, Sinhaladvípa, Sarandib, or Ceylon,
375:1b The Flowery Hill of course is mythical.
375:2b The whole of the geography south of Lanká is of 
course mythical. Súryaván means Sunny.
375:3b Vaidyut means connected with lightning.
375:4b Agastya is here placed far to the south of Lanká. Earlier in this Canto he was said to dwell on Malaya.
375:5b Bhogavatí has been frequently mentioned: it is the capital of the serpent Gods or demons, and usually 
represented as being in the regions under the earth.

375:6b Vásuki is according to some accounts the king 
of the Nágas or serpent Gods.
Next: Canto XLII.: The Army of The West.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLII.: THE ARMY OF THE WEST.
Then to Sushen Sugríva bent,
And thus addressed him reverent:'Two hundred thousand of our bestWith thee, my lord, shall seek the west.Explore Suráshtra's 
3 distant plain,
Explore Váhlíka's 4 wild domain,
And all the pleasant brooks that fleeThrough mountains to the western sea.Search clustering groves on mountainheights,And woods the whom of anchorites.Search where the breezy hills are high,Search where the desert regions lie.Search all the western land beset
With woody mountains like a net.
The country's farthest limit reach,And stand upon the ocean beach.There wander through the groves of palmWhere the soft air is full of balm.Through grassy dell and dark ravineSeek Rávan and the Maithil queen.Go visit Somagiri's 
1b steep

Where Sindhu 2b mingles with the deep.
There lions, borne on swift wings, roam
The levels of their mountain home,And elephants and monsters bear,Caught from the ocean, to their lair.You Vánars, changing forms at will.With rapid search must scour the hill,And his sky-kissing peak of goldWhere loveliest trees their blooms unfold.There golden-peaked, ablaze with light,Uprises Páriyátra's 
3b height
Where wild Gandharvas, fierce and fell,In bands of countless myriads dwell.Pluck ye no fruit within the wood;Beware the impious neighbourhood,Where, very mighty, strong, and hardTo overcome, the fruit they guard.Yet search for Janak's daughter still,For Vánars there need fear no ill.Near, bright as turkis, Vajra 
4b named,
There stands a hill of diamond framed.Soaring a hundred leagues in pride,With trees and creepers glorified.Search there each cave and dark abyssBy waterfall and precipice.Far in that sea the wild waves beatOn Chakraván's 
5b firm-rooted feet.
Where the great discus, 6b thousand rayed,
By Vísvakarmá's 7b art was made.

When Panchajan 8b the fiend was slain.
And Hayagríva, 9b fierce in vain,
p. 377
Thence taking shell and discus went
Lord Vishnu, God preeminent.On sixty thousand hills of goldWith wondering eyes shall ye behold,Where in his glory every oneIs brilliant as the morning sun.Full in the midst King Meru, 
1 best
Of mountains, lifts his lofty crest,On whom of yore, as all have heard,The sun well-pleased this boon conferred:'On thee, O King, on thee and thineLight, day and night, shall ever shine.Gandharvas, Gods who love thee wellAnd on thy sacred summits dwell,Undimmed in lustre, bright and fair,The golden sheen shall ever share.'The Vis'vas, 
2 Vasus 3 they who ride
The tempest, 4 every God beside,
Draw nigh to Meru's lofty crestWhen evening darkens in the west,And to the parting Lord of DayThe homage of their worship pay,Ere yet a while, unseen of all,Behind Mount Asta's  
5 peaks he fall.

Wrought by the heavenly artist's care
A glorious palace glitters there,And round about it sweet birds singWhere the gay trees are blossoming:
The home of Varun  
1b high souled-lord,
Wrist-girded with his deadly cord. 2b
With ten tall stems, a palm between
Meru and Asta's hill is seen:Pure silver from the base it springs,And far and wide its lustre flings.Seek Rávanthe dame by brook,In pathless glen, in leafy nookOn Meru's crest a hermit livesBright with the light that penance gives:Sávarni  
3b is he named, renowned
As Brahmá's peer, with glory crowned.There bowing down in reverence speakAnd ask him of the dame you seek.Thus far the splendid Lord of DayPursues through heaven his ceaseless way,Shedding on every spot his light;Then sinks behind Mount Asta's height,Thus far advance: the sunless seaBeyond is all unknown to me.Sushen of mighty arm, long triedIn peril, shall your legions guide,Receive his words with high respect,And ne'er his lightest wish neglect.

He is my consort's sire, and hence
Deserves the utmost reverence.'
Footnotes
376:1 S'ailúsha, Gramini, Siksha, Suka, Babhru.
376:2 The distant south beyond the confines of the earth 
is the home of departed spirits and the city of Yama the 
God of Death.
376:3 Suráshtra, the 'good country,' is the modern Surat.
376:4 A country north-west of Afghanistan, Baíkh
376:1b The Moon-mountain here is mythical.
376:2b Sindhu is the Indus.
376:3b Páriyátra, or as more usually written Páripátra, 
is the central or western portion of the Vindhya chain 
which skirts the province of Malwa.
376:4b Vajra means both diamond and thunderbolt, the 
two substances being supposed to be identical.

376:5b Chakraván means the discus-bearer.
376:6b The discus is the favourite weapon of Vishnu
376:7b The Indian Hephaistos or Vulcan.
376:8b Panchajan was a demon who lived in the sea in 
the form of a conch shell. WILSON'S Vishnu Pura'na,* 
V. 21.
376:9b Hayagríva,Horse-necked, is the name of a 
Daitya who at the dissolution of the universe caused by 
Brahmá's sleep, seized and carried off the Vedas. Vishnu slew him and recovered the sacred treasures.
377:1 Meru stands in the centre of Jambudwípa and 
consequently of the earth. "The sun travels round the 
world, keeping Meru always on his right. To the spectator who fronts him, therefore, as he rises Meru must be always on the north; and as the sun's rays do not penetrate beyond the centre of the mountain, the regions beyond, or to the north of it must be in darkness, whilst those on the south of it must be in light: north and south being relative, not absolute, terms, depending on the position of the spectator with regard to the Sun and Meru." WILSON'S Vishnu Pura'na, Vol. II. p. 243. Note.

377:2 The Vis'vadevas are a class of deities to whom 
sacrifices should be daily offered, as part of the ordinary 
worship of the householder. According to the Váyun Purána this is a privilege conferred on them by Brahmá and the Pitris as a reward for religious austerities practised by them upon Himálaya.
377:3 The eight Vasus were originally personifications 
like other Vedic deities, of natural phenomena, such as 
Fire, Wind, &c. Their appellations are variously given by different authorities.
377:4 The Maruts or Storm-Gods, frequently addressed 
and worshipped as the attendants and allies of Indra.
377:5 The mountain behind which the sun sets.
Next: Canto XLIII.: The Army of The North.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIII.: THE ARMY OF THE 
NORTH.
Forth went the legions of the west:
And wise Sugríva addressedS'atabal, summoned from the crowd.To whom the sovereign cried aloud:'Go forth, O Vánarf, go forth,Explore the regions of the north.Thy host a hundred thousand be,And Yama's sons  
4b attend on thee.
With dauntless courage, strength, and skillSearch every river, wood, and hill.Through every land in order goRight onward to the Hills of Snow.Search mid the peaks that shine afar,In woods of Lodh and Deodár. 
5b
Search if with Janak's daughter, screenedBy sheltering rocks, there lie the fiend
p. 378
The holy grounds of Soma treadBy Gods and minstrels visited.Reach Kála's mount, and flats that lie

Among the peaks that tower on high.
Then leave that hill that gleams with ore,And fair Sudars'an's heights explore.Then on to Devasakhát 
1 hie.
Loved by the children of the sky.A dreary land you then will seeWithout a hill or brook or tree,A hundred leagues, bare, wild, and dreadIn lifeless desolation, spread.Pursue your onward way, and hasteThrough the dire horrors of the wasteUntil triumphant with delightYou reach Kailása'stering height.There stands a palace decked with gold,For King Kuvera  
2 wrought of old,
A home the heavenly artist plannedAnd fashioned with his cunning hand.There lotuses adorn the floodWith full-blown flower and opening budWhere swans and mallards float, and gayApsarases  
3 come down to play.
There King Vaisravan's  4 self, the lord
By all the universe adored,Who golden gifts to mortals sends,Lives with the Guhyakas  
5 his friends.
Search every cavern in the steep,And green glens where the moonbeams sleep.If haply in that distant groundThe robber and the dame be found.

Then on to Krauncha's hill,  6 and through
His fearful pass your way pursue:
Though dark and terrible the valeYour wonted courage must not fail.There through abyss and cavern seek,On lofty ridge, and mountain peak.On, on! pursue your journey stillBy valley, lake, and towering hill.Reach the North Kurus' land, where restThe holy spirits of the blest;Where golden buds of lilies gleamResplendent on the silver stream,
And leaves of azure turkis throw
Soft splendour on the waves below.Bright as the sun at early mornFair pools that happy clime adorn,Where shine the loveliest flowers on stemsOf crystal and all valued gems.Blue lotuses through all the landThe glories of their blooms expand,And the resplendent earth is strownWith peerless pearl and precious stone.There stately trees can scarce upholdThe burthen of their fruits of gold,And ever flaunt their gay attireOf flower and leaf like flames of fire.All there sweet lives untroubled spendIn bliss and joy that know not end,

While pearl-decked maidens laugh, or sing
To music of the silvery string.  1b
Still on your forward journey keep,And rest you by the northern deep,Where springing from the billows highMount Somagiri  
2b seeks the sky,
And lightens with perpetual glowThe sunless realm that lies below.There, present through all life's extent,Dwells Brahmá Lord preeminent,And round the great God, manifestIn Rudra  
3b forms high sages rest.
Then turn, O Vánarsrch no more,Nor tempt the sunless, boundless shore.'
Footnotes
377:1b One of the oldest and mightiest of the Vedic 
deities; in later mythology regard ed as the God of the 
sea.
377:2b The knotted noose with which he seizes and 
punishes transgressors.
377:3b Sávarni Manu, Manuspring of the Sun by Chháyá.

377:4b The poet has not said who the sons of Yama are.
377:5b The Lodhra or Lodh (Symplocoa Racemosa) 
and the DevadárueodaDeodar are well known trees.
378:1 The hills mentioned are not identifiable. Soma means the Moon. Kála, black; Sudaras'an, fair to see; 
and Devasakhá friend of the Gods
378:2 The God of Wealth.
378:3 The nymphs of Paradise.
378:4 Kuvera the son of Vis'ravas.
378:5 A class of demigods who, like the Yakshas, are 
the attendants of Kuvera, and the guardians of his 
treasures.
378:6 Situated in the eastern part of the Himálaya chain, 
on the north of Assam. The mountain was torn asunder 
and the pass formed by the War-God Kártikeya and Paras'uráma.
Next: Canto XLIV.: The Ring.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIV.: THE RING.
But special counselling he gave
To Hanumánwise and brave:
p. 379
To him on whom his soul relied,With friendly words the monarch cried:'O best of Vánarsght can stayBy land or sea thy rapid way,Who through the air thy flight canst bend,And to the Immortals' home ascend.All realms, I ween, are known to theeWith every mountain, lake, and sea.In strength and speed which naught can tireThou, worthy rival of thy sireThe mighty monarch of the wind,Where'er thou wilt a way canst find.Exert thy power, O swift and strong,Bring back the lady lost so long,For time and place, O thou most wise,Lie open to thy searching eyes.'   When Ráma heard that special bestTo Hanumáne the rest,He from the monarch's favour drew

Hope of success and trust anew
That he on whom his lord relied,In toil and peril trained and tried,Would to a happy issue bringThe task commanded by the king.He gave the ring that bore his name,A token for the captive dame,That the sad lady in her woeThe missive of her lord might know.'This ring,' he said, 'my wife will see,Nor fear an envoy sent by me.Thy valour and thy skill combined,Thy resolute and vigorous mind,And King Sugríva's behest,With joyful hopes inspire my breast.'
Footnotes
378:1b "The Uttara Kurus, it should be remarked, may 
have been a real people, as they are mentioned in the 
Altareya BráhmanaI. 14 ... "Wherefore the several nations who dwell in this northern quarter, beyond the Himavat, the Uttara Kurus and the Uttara Madras are consecrated to glorious dominion, and people term them the glorious. In another passage of the same work, however, the Uttara Kurus are treated as belonging to 

the domain of mythology." MUIR's Sanskrit Texts. Vol. 
I p. 494. See ADDITIONAL NOTES.
378:2b The Moon-mountain.
378:3b The Rudras are the same as the storm winds, 
more usually called Maruts, and are often associated 
with Indra. In the later mythology the Rudras are regarded as inferior manifestations of S'iva, and most of their names are also names of Siva.
Next: Canto XLV.: The Departure.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLV.: THE DEPARTURE.
Away, away the Vánars
Like locusts o'er the land outspread.To northern realms where rising highThe King of Mountains cleaves the sky,Fierce S'atabal with vast arrayOf Vánariors led the way.Far southward, as his lord decreed,Wise Hanumán Wind-God's seed,With Angad his swift way pursued,And Tára's warlike multitude,Strong Vinata with all his bandBetook him to the eastern land,And brave Sushen in eager questSped swiftly to the gloomy west.Each Vánarftain sought with speedThe quarter by his king decreed,While from his legions rose on highThe shout and boast and battle cry:'We will restore the dame and beatThe robber down beneath our feet.My arm alone shall win the dayFrom Rávanin single fray,Shall rob the robber of his life,And rescue Ráma's captive wife

All trembling in her fear and woe.
Here, comrades, rest: no farther go:For I will vanquish hell, and sheShall by this arm again be free.The rooted mountains will I rend,The mightiest trees will break and bend.Earth to her deep foundations cleave,And make the calm sea throb and heave.A hundred leagues from steep to steepIn desperate bound my feet shall leap.My steps shall tread unchecked and free.Through woods, o'er land and hill and sea,Range as they list from flood to fell,And wander through the depths of hell.
Next: Canto XLVI.: Sugríva's.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVI.: SUGRÍVA'S.
'How, King,' cried Ráma, 'didst thou gain
Thy lore of sea and hill and plain?'I told thee how,' Sugríva,From Báli's arm Máyáví  
1
To Malaya's hill, and strove to saveHis life by hiding in the cave.I told how Báli sought, to killHis foe, the hollow of the hill;Nor need I, King, again unfoldThe wondrous tale already told.Then, wandering forth, my way I tookBy many a town and wood and brook.I roamed the earth from place to place,Till, like a mirror's polished face,The whole broad disk, that lies betweenIts farthest bounds, mine eyes had seen.I wandered first to eastern skiesWhere fairest trees rejoiced mine eyes,And many a cave and wooded hillWhere lilies robed the lake and rill.There metal dyes that hill  
2 adorn
Whence springs the sun to light the morn.There, too, I viewed the Milky sea,

Where nymphs of heaven delight to be.
Then to the south I made my wayFrom regions of the rising day,And roamed o'er Vindhya, where the breezeIs odorous of sandal trees.Still in my fear I found no rest:I sought the regions of the west,And gazed on Asta,  
3 where the sun
p. 380
Sinks when his daily course is runThen from that noblest hill I fledAnd to the northern country sped,Saw Himavánt 
1 and Meru'Meru'sp,
And stood beside the northern deep.But when, by Báli's might oppressed,E'en in those wilds I could not rest,Came Hanumánwise and brave,And thus his prudent counsel gave:'I told thee how Matanga  
2 cursed
Thy tyrant, that his head should burstIn pieces, should be dare invadeThe precincts of that tranquil shade.There may we dwell in peace and beFrom thy oppressor's malice free.'We went to Rishyamúka's,And spent our days secure from illWhere, with that curse upon his head,

The cruel Báli durst not tread.'
Footnotes
379:1 Canto IX.
379:2 Udayagiri or the hill from which the sun rises.
379:3 Asta is the mountain behind which the sun sets.
Next: Canto XLVII.: The Return.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVII.: THE RETURN.
Thus forth in quest of Sitá
The legions King Sugríva.To many a distant town they hiedBy many a lake and river's side.As their great sovereign's order taught,Through valleys, plains, and groves they sought.They toiled unresting through the day:At night upon the ground they layWhere the tall trees, whose branches swayedBeneath their fruit, gave pleasant shade.Then, when a weary month was spent,Back to Prasravan's hill they went,And stood with faces of despairBefore their king Sugrívae.Thus, having wandered through the east,Great Vinata his labours ceased,And weary of the fruitless painReturned to meet the king again,Brave S'atabali to the northHad led his Vánarons forth.Now to Sugríva he spedWith all his host dispirited.Sushen the western realms had sought.And homeward now his legions brought.

All to Sugriva came, where still
He sat with Ráma on the hill.Before their sovereign humbly bentAnd thus addressed him reverent:'On every hill our steps have been,By wood and cave and deep ravine;
And all the wandering brooks we know
throughout the land that seaward flow,Our feet by thy command have tracedthe tangled thicket and the waste,and dens and dingles hard to passfor creeping plants and matted grassWell have we searched with toil and pain,And monstrous creatures have we slainBut Hanumánoblest mindThe Maithil lady yet will find;For to his quarter of the sky  
1b
The robber fiend was seen to fly,'
Footnotes
380:1 Himálaya, the Hills of Snow.
380:2 Canto XI.

Next: Canto XLVIII.: The Asur's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVIII.: THE ASUR'S DEATH.
But Hanumánl onward pressed
With Tára, Angad, and the rest,Through Vindhya's pathless glens he spedAnd left no spot unvisited.He gazed from every mountain height,He sought each cavern dark as night,And wandered through the bloomy shadeBy pool and river and cascade,But, though they sought in every place,Of Sitáthey found no trace.On fruit and woodland berries fedThrough many a lonely wild they sped,And reached at last, untouched by fear,A desert terrible and drear:A fruitless waste, a land of gloomWhere trees were bare of leaf and bloomWhere every scanty stream was dried,And niggard earth her roots denied.No elephants through all the ground,No buffaloes or deer are found.There roams no tiger, pard, or bear,No creature of the wood is there.No bird displays his glittering wings,No tree, no shrub, no creeper springs.

There rise no lilies from the flood,
Resplendent with their flower and bud,Where the delighted bees may throngAbout the fragrance with their song.There lived a hermit Kandu named,For truth and wealth of penance famed.Whom fervent zeal and holy riteHad dowered with all-surpassing might.His little son, a ten year child--So chanced it--perished in the wild.His death with fury stirred the sage,Who cursed the forest in his rage,Doomed from that hour to shelter none,A waste for bird and beast to shun.
p. 381
They searched by every forest edge,They searched each cave and mountain ledge,And thickets whence the water fellWandering through the tangled dell.Striving to do Sugríva'sThey roamed along each leafy rill.But vain were all endeavours, vainThe careful search, the toil and pain.Through one dark grove they scarce could wind,So thick were creepers intertwined.There as they struggled through the woodBefore their eyes an Asur  
1 stood.

High as a towering hill, his pride
The very Gods in heaven defied.When on the fiend their glances fellEach braced him for the combat well.The demon raised his arm on high,And rushed upon them with a cry.Him Angad smote,--for, sure, he thoughtThis was the fiend they long had sought.From his huge mouth by Angad felled,The blood in rushing torrents welled,As, like a mountain from his baseUptorn, he dropped upon his face.Thus fell the mighty fiend: and theyThrough the thick wood pursued their way;Then, weary with the toil, reclinedWhere leafy boughs to shade them twined.
Footnotes
380:1b Hanumánthe leader of the army of the south 
which was under the nominal command of Angad the 
heir apparent.
Next: Canto XLIX.: Angad's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIX.: ANGAD'S SPEECH.
Then Angad spake: 'We Vánars
Have searched each valley, cave, and dell,And hill, and brook, and dark recess,And tangled wood, and wilderness.But all in vain: no eye has seenThe robber or the Maithil queen.A dreary time has passed away,And stern is he we all obey.Come, cast your grief and sloth aside:Again be every effort tried;So haply may our toil attainThe sweet success that follows pain.Laborious effort, toil, and skill,The firm resolve, the constant willSecure at last the ends we seek:Hence, O my friends, I boldly speak.Once more then, noble hearts, once moreLet us to-day this wood explore,And, languor and despair subdued,Purchase success with toil renewed.
Sugríva king austere,
And Ráma's wrath we needs must fear.Come, Vánarsye think it wise,

And do the thing that I advise'
   Then Gandhamádan repliedWith lips that toil and thirst had dried;'Obey his words, for wise and trueIs all that he has counselled you.Come, let your hosts their toil renewAnd search each grove and desert through,Each towering hill and forest glade.By lake and brook and white cascade,Till every spot, as our great lordCommanded, be again explored.'   Uprose the Vánarsand all,Obedient to the chieftain's call,And over the southern region spedWhere Vindhya's tangled forests spread.They clomb that hill that towers on highLike a huge cloud in autumn's sky,Where many a cavern yawns, and streaksOf radiant silver deck the peaks.In eager search they wandered throughThe forests where the Lodh trees grew,Where the dark leaves were thick and green,But found not Ráma's darling queen.Then faint with toil, their hearts depressed,Descending from the mountain's crest,Their weary limbs a while to easeThey lay beneath the spreading trees.

Footnotes
381:1 The Bengal recension--Corrosions edition-- calls 
this Asur or demon the son of Márícha
Next: Canto L.: The Enchanted Cave.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO L.: THE ENCHANTED CAVE.
Angad and Tára by his side,
Again rose HanumántriedEach mountain cavern, dark and deep,And stony pass and wooded steep,The lion's and the tiger's home,By rushing torrents white with foam.Then with new ardour, south and west,O'er Vindhya's height the search they pressed.The day prescribed was near and theyStill wandered on their weary way.They reached the southern land besetWith woody mountains like a net.At length a mighty cave they spiedThat opened in a mountain's side.Where many a verdant creeper grewAnd o'er the mouth its tendrils threw.Thence issued crane, and swan, and drake,And trooping birds that love the lake.The Vánarsed within to coolTheir fevered lips in spring or pool.Vast was the cavern dark and dread,Where not a ray of light was shed;Yet not the more their eyesight failed,

p. 382
Their courage sank or valour quailed.
On through the gloom the VánarssedWith hunger, thirst, and toil distressed,Poor helpless wanderers, sad, forlorn,With wasted faces wan and worn.At length, when life seemed lost for aye,They saw a splendour as of day,A wondrous forest, fair and bright,Where golden trees shot flamy light.And lotus-covered pools were thereWith pleasant waters fresh and fair,And streams their rippling currents rolledBy seats of silver and of gold.Fair houses reared their stately heightOf burnished gold and lazulite,And glorious was the lustre thrownThrough lattices of precious stone.And there were flowers and fruit on stemsOf coral decked with rarest gems,And emerald leaves on silver trees,And honeycomb and golden bees.Then as the Vánarser drew,A holy woman met their view.Around her form was duly tiedA garment of the blackdeer's hide. 
1
Pure votaress she shone with lightOf fervent zeal and holy rite.

Then Hanumánre the rest
With reverent words the dame addressed:'Who art thou? say: and who is lordOf this vast cave with treasures stored?'
Next: Canto LI.: Svayamprabhá

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LI.: SVAYAMPRABHÁ
'Assailed by thirst and hunger, dame,
Within a gloomy vault we came.We saw the cavern opening wide,And straight within its depths we hied.But utterly amazed are weAt all the marvels that we see.Whose are the golden trees that gleamWith splendour like the morning's beam?These cates of noblest sort? these roots?This wondrous store of rarest fruits?Whose are these calm and cool retreats,These silver homes and golden seats,And lattices of precious stones?Who is the happy lord that ownsThe golden trees, of rarest scent,Neath loads of fruit and blossom bent?Who, strong in holy zeal, had powerTo deck the streams with richest dower,And bade the lilies bright with goldThe glory of their blooms unfold,
Where fish in living gold below
The sheen of changing colours show?Thine is the holy power, I ween,

That beautified the wondrous scene;
But if another's, lady, deignTo tell us, and the whole explain.'To him the lady of the caveIn words like, these her answer gave:'Skilled Maya framed in days of oldThis magic wood of growing gold.The chief artificer in placeWas he of all the Dánav.He, for his wise enchantments famed,This glorious dwelling planned and framedHe for a thousand years enduredThe sternest penance, and securedFrom Brahmá of all boons the best,The knowledge Us'anas  
1b possessed.
Lord, by that boon, of all his will,He fashioned all with perfect skill;And, with his blissful state content,In this vast grove a season spent.By Indra's jealous bolt he fellFor loving Hemá's 
2b charms too well.
And Brahmá on that nymph bestowedThe treasures of this fair abode,Wherein her tranquil days to spendIn happiness that ne'er may end.Sprung of a lineage old and high,Merusávarni's  
3b daughter, I
Guard ever for that heavenly dameThis home, Svayamprabhát 
4b my name,-

For I have loved the lady long,
So skilled in arts of dance and song.But say what cause your steps has ledThe mazes of this grove to tread.
p. 383
How, strangers did ye chance to spyThe wood concealed from wanderer's eye?Tell clearly why ye come: but firstEat of this fruit and quench your thirst.'
Footnotes
382:1 The skin of the black antelope was the ascetic's 
proper garb.
382:1b Us'anas is the name of a sage mentioned in the Vedas. In the epic poems he is identified with S'ukra, 
the regent of the planet Venus, and described as the preceptor of the Asuras or Daityas, and possessor of vast knowledge.
382:2b Hemáne of the nymphs of Paradise.
382:3b Merusávarni general name for the last four of 

the fourteen Manus.
382:4b Svayamprabhá "self-luminous" is according to 
DE GUBERNATIS the moon: "In the 
Svayamprabhátoo, we meet with the moon as a good fairy who, from the golden palace which she reserves for her friend Hemá golden one:) is during a month the guide, in the vast cavern of Hanumant and his companions, who have lost their way in the search of the dawn Sitáis is not quite accurate: HanumHanumán and his companions wander for a month in the cavern without a guide, and then Svayamprabhás them out.
Next: Canto LII.: The Exit.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LII.: THE EXIT.
'Ráma,' he cried, 'a prince whose sway
All peoples of the earth obey,To Dandak's tangled forest cameWith his brave brother and his dame.From that dark shade of forest boughsThe giant Rávan stole his spouse.Our king Sugríva's orders sendThese Vánars forth to aid his friend,That so the lady be restoredUninjured to her sorrowing lord.With Angad and the rest, this bandHas wandered through the southern land,With careful search in every placeThe lady and the fiend to traceWe roamed the southern region o'er,And stood upon the ocean's shore.By hunger pressed our strength gave way;Beneath the spreading trees we lay,And cried, worn out with toil and woe,'No farther, comrades, can we go.'Then as our sad eyes looked aroundWe spied an opening in the ground,Where all was gloomy dark behindThe creeping plants that o'er it twined.

Forth trooping from the dark-recess
Came swans and mallards numberless,With drops upon their shining wingsAs newly bathed where water springs.'On, comrades, to the cave,' I criedAnd all within the portal hied.Each clasping fast another's handFar onward pressed the Vánar band;And still, as thirst and hunger drove,We traced the mazes of the grove.Here thou with hospitable careHast fed us with the noblest fare,Preserving us, about to die,With this thy plentiful supply.But how, O pious lady, say,May we thy gracious boon repay?'   He ceased: the ascetic dame replied:'Well, Vánars, am I satisfied.A life of holy works I lead,And from your hands no service need.'Then spake again the Vánar chief:'We came to thee and found relief.Now listen to a new distress,And aid us, holy votaress.Our wanderings in this vasty caveExhaust the time Sugríva gave.Once more then, lady, grant release,And let thy suppliants go in peaceAgain upon their errand sped,

For King Sugríva's ire we dread.
And the great task our sovereign set,Alas, is unaccomplished yet.'   Thus Hanumán their leader prayed,And thus the dame her answer made:Scarce may the living find their wayReturning hence to light of day;But I will free you through the mightOf penance, fast, and holy rite.Close for a while your eyes, or ne'erMay you return to upper air.'She ceased: the Vánars all obeyed;Their fingers on their eyes they laid,And, ere a moment's time had fled,Were through the mazy cavern led.Again the gracious lady spoke,And joy in every bosom woke:'Lo, here again is Vindhya's hill,Whose valleys trees and creepers fill;And, by the margin of the sea,Prasravan where you fain would be.'With blessings then she bade adieu,And swift within the cave withdrew.
Next: Canto LIII.: Angad's Counsel.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIII.: ANGAD'S COUNSEL.
They looked upon the boundless main
The awful seat of Varun's reign.And heard his waters roar and raveTerrific with each crested wave.Then, in the depths of sorrow drowned,They sat upon the bosky ground,And sadly, as they pondered, grievedFor days gone by and naught achieved.Pain pierced them through with sharper stingWhen, gazing on the trees of spring,They saw each waving bough that showedThe treasures of its glorious load,And helpless, fainting with the weightOf woe they sank disconsolate.Then, lion-shouldered, stout and strong,The noblest of the Vánar throng,Angad the prince imperial rose,And, deeply stricken by the woesThat his impetuous spirit broke,Thus gently to the chieftains spoke:'Mark ye not, Vánars, that the dayOur monarch fixed has passed away?The month is lost in toil and pain,And now, my friends, what hopes remain?

On you, in lore of counsel tried,
Our king Sugríva most relied.Your hearts, with strong affection fraught,
p. 384
His weal in every labour sought,And the true valour of your bandWas blazoned wide in every land.Forth on the toilsome search you sped,By me--for so he willed it--led.To us, of every hope bereft,Death is the only refuge left.For none a happy life may seeWho fails to do our king's decree.Come, let us all from food abstain,And perish thus, since hope is vain.Stern is our king and swift to ire,Imperious, proud, and fierce like fire,And ne'er will pardon us the crimeOf fruitless search and wasted time.Far better thus to end our lives,And leave our wealth, our homes and wives,Leave our dear little ones and all,Than by his vengeful hand to fall.Think not Sugríva's wrath will spareMe Báli's son, imperial heir:For Raghu's royal son, not he,To this high place anointed me,

Sugríva, long my bitter foe,
With eager hand will strike the blow,And, mindful of the old offence,Will slay me now for negligence,Nor will my pitying friends have powerTo save me in the deadly hour.No--here, O chieftains, will I lieBy ocean's marge, and fast and die.'   They heard the royal prince declareThe purpose of his fixt despair;And all, by common terror moved,His speech in these sad words approved:'Sugríva's heart is hard and stern,And Ráma's thoughts for Sítá yearn.Our forfeit lives will surely payFor idle search and long delay,And our fierce king will bid us dieThe favour of his friend to buy.'   Then Tára softly spake to cheerThe Vánars' hearts oppressed by fear:'Despair no more, your doubts dispel:Come in this ample cavern dwell.There may we live in blissful easeMid springs and fruit and bloomy trees,Secure from every foe's assault,For magic framed the wondrous vault.Protected there we need not fearThough Ráma and our king come near;Nor dread e'en him who batters down

The portals of the foeman's town.'  1
Footnotes
384:1 Purandara, the destroyer of cities; the cities being 
the clouds which the God of the firmament bursts open 
with his thunderbolts, to release the waters imprisoned in these fortesses of the demons of drought.
Next: Canto LIV.: Hanumán's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIV.: HANUMÁN'S SPEECH.
But Hanumán, while Tára, best
Of splendid chiefs his thought expressed,Perceived that Báli's princely sonA kingdom for himself had won.  
1b
His keen eye marked in him combinedThe warrior's arm, the ruler's mind,And every noble gift should graceThe happy sovereign of his race:Marked how he grew with ripening ageMore glorious and bold and sage,--Like the young moon that night by nightShines on with ever waxing light,--Brave as his royal father, wiseAs he who counsels in the skies:  
2b
Marked how, forwearied with the quest,He heeded not his liege's hest,But Tára's every word obeyedLike Indra still by Sukra  
3b swayed.
Then with his prudent speech he triedTo better thoughts the prince to guide,And by division's skilful artThe Vánars and the youth to part:'Illustrious Angad, thou in fight

Hast far surpassed thy father's might,
Most worthy, like thy sire of old,The empire of our race to hold.The Vánars' fickle people rangeFrom wish to wish and welcome change.Their wives and babes they will not leaveAnd to their new-made sovereign cleave.No art, no gifts will draw awayThe Vánars from Sugríva's sway,Through hope of wealth, through fear of painStill faithful will they all remain.Thou fondly hopest in this caveThe vengeance of the foe to brave.But Lakshman's arm a shower will sendOf deadly shafts those walls to rend.Like Indra's bolts his shafts have powerTo cleave the mountain like a flower.O Angad, mark my counsel well:If in this cave thou choose to dwell,
p. 385
Footnotes
384:1b Perceived that Angad had secured, through the 
love of the Vánars, the reversion of Sugríva's kingdom; 
or, as another commentator explains it, perceived that 

Angad had obtained a new kingdom in the enchanted 
cave which the Vánars, through love of him, would consent to occupy.
384:2b Váchaspati, Lord of Speech, the Preceptor of the 
Gods.
384:3b Sukra is the regent of the planet Venus, and the preceptor of the Daítyas.
Next: Canto LVI: 

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVI: 
These Vánar hosts with one accord
Will quit thee for their lawful lord,And turn again with thirsty eyesTo wife and babe and all they prize.Thou in the lonely cavern leftOf followers and friends bereft,Wilt be in all thy woe, alas,Weak as a blade of trembling grass:And Lakshman's arrows, keen and fierceFrom his strong bow, thy heart will pierce.But if in lowly reverence meekSugríva's court with us thou seek,He, as thy birth demands, will shareThe kingdom with the royal heir.Thy loving kinsman, true and wise,Looks on thee still with favouring eyes.Firm in his promise, pure is he,And ne'er will vex or injure thee.He loves thy mother, lives for herA faithful friend and worshipper.That mother's love thou mayst not spurn:Her only child, return, return.'

Next: Canto LV.: Angad's Reply

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LV.: ANGAD'S REPLY
'What truth or justice canst thou find,'
Cried Angad, 'in Sugríva's mind ?Where is his high and generous soul,His purity and self-control?How is he worthy of our trust,Righteous, and true, and wise, and just,Who, shrinking not from sin and shame,Durst take his living brother's dame?Who, when, in stress of mortal strifeHis noble brother fought for life,Against the valiant warrior barredThe portal which he stood to guard?Can he be grateful--he who tookThe hand of Ráma, and forsookThat friend who saved him in his woes,To whom his life and fame he owes?Ah no! his heart is cold and mean,What bids him search for Ráma's queen?Not honour's law, not friendship's debt,But angry Lakshman's timely threat.No prudent heart will ever placeIts trust in one so false and base,Who heeds not friendship, kith or kin,Who scorns the law and cleaves to sin.

But true or false, whate'er he be,
One consequence I clearly see;Me, in my youth anointed heirAgainst his wish, he will not spare,But strike with eager hand the blowThat rids him of a household foe.Shall I of power and friends despoiled,In all my purpose crossed and foiled,--Shall I Kishkindhá seek, and wait,Like some poor helpless thing, my fate?The cruel wretch through lust of swayWill seize upon his hapless prey,And to a prison's secret gloomThe remnant of my years will doom.'Tis better far to fast and dieThan hopeless bound in chains to lie,Your steps, O Vánars, homeward bendAnd leave me here my life to end.Better to die of hunger hereThan meet at home the fate I fearGo, bow you at Sugríva's feet,And in my name the monarch greet.Before the sons of Raghu bend,And give the greeting that I sendGreet kindly Rumá too, for sheA son's affection claims from me,And gently calm with friendly careMy mother Tárá's wild despair;Or when she hears her darling's fate

The queen will die disconsolate.'
   Thus Angad bade the chiefs adieu:Then on the ground his limbs he threwWhere sacred Darbha  
1 grass was spread,
And wept as every hope had fled.The moving words of Augad drewDown aged cheeks the piteous dew.And, as the chieftains' eyes grew dim,They swore to stay and die with him.On holy grass whose every bladeWas duly, pointing southward, laid,The Vánars sat them down and bentTheir faces to the orient,While 'Here, O comrades, let us dieWith Angad,' was the general cry.
Next: Canto LVI.: Sampáti.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVI.: SAMPÁTI.
Then came the vultures' mighty king
Where sat the Vánars sorrowing,--Sampáti,  
2 best of birds that fly
On sounding pinions through the sky,Jatáyus' brother, famed of old,Most glorious and strong and bold.Upon the slope of Vindhya's hillHe saw the Vánars calm and still.
p. 386
These words he uttered while the sightFilled his fierce spirit with delight:'Behold how Fate with changeless lawsWithin his toils the sinner draws,And brings me, after long delay,A rich and noble feast to-day,These Vánars who are doomed to dieMy hungry maw to satisfy.'   He spoke no more: and Angad heardThe menace of the mighty bird;And thus, while anguish filled his breast,The noble Hanumán addressed:

'Vivasvat's  1 son has sought this place
For vengeance on the Vánar race.
See, Yama, wroth for Sítá's sake,Is come our guilty lives to take.Our king's decree is left undone,And naught achieved for Raghu's son.In duty have we failed, and henceComes punishment for dire offence.Have we not heard the marvels wroughtBy King Jatáyus,  
2 how he fought
With Rávan's might, and, nobly brave,Perished, the Maithil queen to save?There is no living creature, none,But loves to die for Raghu's son,And in long toils and dangers weHave placed our lives in jeopardyBlest is Jatáyus, he who gaveHis life the Maithil queen to save,And proved his love for Ráma wellWhen by the giant's hand he fellNow raised to bliss and high renownHe fears not fierce Sugríva's frown.Alas, alas! what miseries springFrom that rash promise of the king!  
3
His own sad death, and Ráma sentWith Lakshman forth to banishment:The Maithil lady borne away:Jatáyus slain in mortal fray:The fall of Báli when the dart

Of Ráma quivered in his heart:
And, after toil and pain and care,Our misery and deep despair.'   He ceased: the feathered monarch heard,His heart with ruth and wonder stirred:'Whose is that voice,' the vulture cried,'That tells me how Jatáyus died,And shakes my inmost soul with woeFor a loved brother's overthrow?After long days at length I hearThe glorious name of one so dear.Once more, O Vánar chieftains, tellHow King Jatáyus fought and fell.
But first your aid, I pray you, lend,
And from this peak will I descend.The sun has burnt my wings, and INo longer have the power to fly.'
Footnotes
385:1 The name of various kinds of grass used at 
sacrificial ceremonies, especially, of the Ku'sa grass, 
Poa cynosuroides, which was used to strew the ground in preparing for a sacrifice, the officiating Brahmans being purified by sittihg on it.

385:2 Sampáti is the eldest son of the celebrated Garuda 
the king of birds.
386:1 Vivasvat or the Sun is the father of Yama the God of Death.
386:2 Book III. Canto LI.
386:3 Das'aratha's rash oath and fatal promise to his wife Kaikeyí.
Next: Canto LVII.: Angad's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVII.: ANGAD'S SPEECH.
Though grief and woe his utterance broke
They trusted not the words he spoke;But, looking still for secret guile,Reflected in their hearts a while:'If on our mangled limbs he feed,We gain the death ourselves decreed.'   Then rose the Vánar chiefs, and lentTheir arms to aid the bird's descent;And Angad spake: There lived of yoreA noble Vánar king who boreThe name of Riksharajas, greatAnd brave and strong and fortunate.His sons were like their father: fameKnows Báli and Sugríva's name.Praised in all lands, a glorious kingWas Báli, and from him I spring.Brave Ráma, Das'aratha's heir,A glorious prince beyond compare,His sire and duty's law obeyed,And sought the depths of Dandaks' shadeSítá his well-beloved dame,And Lakshman, with the wanderer came.A giant watched his hour, and stoleThe sweet delight of Ráma's soul.

Jatáyus, Das'aratha's friend,
Swift succour to the dame would lend.Fierce Rávan from his car he felled,And for a time the prize withheld.But bleeding, weak with years, and tired,Beneath the demon's blows expired,Due rites at Ráma's hands obtained,And bliss that ne'er shall minish, gained.Then Ráma with Sugríva madeA covenant for mutual aid,And Báli, to the field defied,By conquering Ráma's arrow died.Sugríva then, by Ráma's grace,Was monarch of the Vánar race.By his command a mighty hostSeeks Ráma's queen from coast to coast.Sent forth by him, in every spotWe looked for her, but find her not.Vain is the toil, as though by nightWe sought to find the Day-God's light.In lands unknown at length we foundA spacious cavern under ground,Whose vaults that stretch beneath the hillWere formed by Maya's magic skill.Through the dark maze our steps were bent,And wandering there a month we spent,
p. 387

And lost, in fruitless error, thus
The days our king allotted us.Thus we though faithful have transgressed,And failed to keep our lord's behest.No chance of safety can we see,No lingering hope of life have we.Sugriva's wrath and Ráma's hatePress on our souls with grievous weight;And we, because 'tis vain to fly,Resolve at length to fast and die.'
Next: Canto LVIII: Tidings of Sitá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVIII: TIDINGS OF SITÁ.
The piteous tears his eye bedewed
As thus his speech the bird renewed;'Alas my brother, slain in fightBy Rávan's unresisted might!I, old and wingless, weak and worn,O'er his sad fate can only mourn.Fled is my youth: in life's declineMy former strength no more is mine.Once on the day when Vritra 
1 died,
We brothers, in ambitious pride,Sought, mounting with adventurous flight,The Day-God garlanded with light.On, ever on we urged our wayWhere fields of ether round us lay,Till, by the fervent heat assailed,My brother's pinions flagged and failed.I marked his sinking strength, and spreadMy stronger wings to screen his head,Till, all my feathers burnt away,On Vindhya's hill I fell and lay.There in my lone and helpless stateI heard not of my brother's fate.'

   Thus King Sampáti spoke and sighed:
And royal Angad thus replied:'If, brother of Jatáyus, thouHast heard the tale I told but now,Obedient to mine earnest prayerThe dwelling of that fiend declare.O, say where cursed Rávan dwells,Whom folly to his death impels.'
   He ceased. Again Sampáti spoke,
And hope in every breast awoke:'Though lost my wings, and strength decayed,Yet shall my words lend Ráma aid.I know the worlds where Vishnu trod, 
1b
I know the realm of Ocean's God;How Asurs fought with heavenly foes,And Amrit from the churning rose. 
2b
A mighty task before me lies,To prosper Ráma's enterprise,A task too hard for one whom lengthOf days has rifled of his strength.I saw the cruel Rávan bearA gentle lady through the air.Bright washer form, and fresh and young,And sparkling gems about her hung.'O Ráma, Ráma!' cried the dame,And shrieked in terror Lakshman's name,As, struggling in the giant's hold,She dropped her gauds of gems and gold.

Like sun-light on a mountain shone
The silken garments she had on,And glistened o'er his swarthy formAs lightning flashes through the storm.That giant Rávan, famed of old,Is brother of the Lord of Gold. 
3b
The southern ocean roars and swellsRound Lanká, where the robber dwellsIn his fair city nobly plannedAnd built by Vis'vakarmá's 
4b hand.
Within his bower securely barred,With monsters round her for a guard,Still in her silken vesture cladLies Sitá, and her heart is sad.A hundred leagues your course must beBeyond this margin of the sea.Still to the south your way pursue,And there the giant Rávan view.Then up, O Vánars, and away!For by my heavenly lore I say,There will you see the lady's face.And hither soon your steps retrace.In the first field of air are borneThe doves and birds that feed on corn.The second field supports the crowsAnd birds whose food on branches grows.Along the third in balanced flightSail the keen osprey and the kite.Swift through the fourth the falcon springs

The fifth the slower vulture wings.
Up to the sixth the gay swans rise,
p. 388
Where royal Vainateya  1 flies.
We too, O chiefs, of vulture race,Our line from Vinatá may trace,Condemned, because we wrought a deedOf shame, on flesh and blood to feed.But all Suparna's  
2 wondrous powers
And length of keenest sight are ours,That we a hundred leagues awayThrough fields of air descry our prey.Now from this spot my gazing eyeCan Rávan and the dame descry.Devise some plan to overleapThis barrier of the briny deep.Find the Videhan lady there,And joyous to your home repair.Me too, O Vánars. to the sideOf Varun's  
3 home the ocean, guide,
Where due libations shall be paidTo my great-hearted brother's shade.'
Footnotes

387:1 Vritra, 'the coverer, hider, obstructer (of rain)' is 
the name of the Vedic personification of an imaginary 
malignant influence or demon of darkness and drought supposed to take possession of the clouds, causing them to obstruct the clearness of the sky and keep back the waters. Indra is represented as battling with this evil influence, and the pent-up clouds being practically represented as mountains or castles are shattered by his thunderbolt and made to open their receptacle.
387:1b Frequent mention has been made of the three 
steps of Vishnu typifying the rising, culmination, and 
setting of the sun.
387:2b For the Churning of the Sea, see Book I, Canto 
XLV.
387:3b Kuvera, the God of Wealth.
387:4b The Architect of the Gods.
Next: Canto LIX.: Sampati's Story.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIX.: SAMPATI'S STORY.
They heard his counsel to the close,
Then swiftly to their feet they rose;And Jambavan with joyous breastThe vulture king again addressed:  "Where, where is Sítá? who has seen,Who borne away the Maithil queen?Who would the lightning flight withstandOf arrows shot by Lakshman's hand"  Again Sampáti spoke to cheerThe Vánars as they bent to hear:'Now listen, and my words shall showWhat of the Maithil dame I know,And in what distant prison liesThe lady of the long dark eyes.Scorched by the fiery God of Day,High on this mighty hill I lay.A long and weary time had passed,And strength and life were failing fast.Yet, ere the breath had left my frame,My son, my dear Supárs'va, came.Each morn and eve he brought me food,And filial care my life renewed.But serpents still are swift to ire.Gandbarvas slaves to soft desire.

And we, imperial vultures, need
A full supply our maws to feed.Once he turned at close of day,Stood by my side, but brought no prey.He looked upon my ravenous eye,Heard my complaint and made reply:
  'Borne on swift wings ere day was light
I stood upon Mahendra's  
1b height,
And, far below, the sea I viewedAnd birds in countless multitude.Before mine eyes a giant flewWhose monstrous form was dark of hueAnd struggling in his grasp was borneA lady radiant as the morn.Swift to the south his course he bent,And cleft the yielding element.The holy spirits of the airCame round me as I marvelled there,And cried as their bright legions met:'O say, is Sítá living yet?'Thus cried the saints and told the nameOf him who held the struggling dame.Then while mine eye with eager lookPursued the path the robber took,I marked the lady's streaming hair,And heard her cry of wild despair.I saw her silken vesture rentAnd stripped of every ornament,

Thus, O my father, fled the time:
Forgive, I pray, the heedless crime.'In vain the mournful tale I heardMy pitying heart to fury stirred.What could a helpless bird of air,Reft of his boasted pinions, dare?Yet can I aid with all that willAnd words can do, and friendly skill.'
Footnotes
388:1 Garuda, son of Vinatá, the sovereign of the birds.
388:2 "The well winged one," Garuda.
388:3 The God of the sea.
Next: Canto LX.: Sampáti's Story

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LX.: SAMPÁTI'S STORY
Then from the flood Sampáti paid
Due offerings to his brother's shade.He bathed him when the rites were done.And spake again to Báli's son:'Now listen, Prince, while I relateHow first I learned the lady's fate.Burnt by the sun's resistless mightI fell and lay on Vindhya's height.Seven nights in deadly swoon I passed,But struggling life returned at last.Around I bent my wondering view,But every spot was strange and new.I scanned the sea with eager ken,And rock and brook and lake and glen,I saw gay trees their branches wave,And creepers mantling o'er the cave.I heard the wild birds' joyous song,And waters as they foamed along,And knew the lovely hill must beMount Vindhya by the southern sea.
p. 389
Revered by heavenly beings, stood

Near where I lay, a sacred wood,
Where great Nis'akar dwelt of yoreAnd pains of awful penance bore.Eight thousand seasons winged their flightOver the toiling anchorite--Upon that hill my days were spent,--And then to heaven the hermit went.At last, with long and hard assay,Down from that height I made my way,And wandered through the mountain passRough with the spikes of Darbha grass.I with my misery worn, and faintWas eager to behold the saint:For often with Jatáyus IHad sought his home in days gone by.As nearer to the grove I drewThe breeze with cooling fragrance blew,And not a tree that was not fair,With richest flower and fruit was there.With anxious heart a while I stayedBeneath the trees' delightful shade,Aud soon the holy hermit, brightWith fervent penance, came in sight.Behind him bears and lions, tameAs those who know their feeder, came,And tigers, deer, and snakes pursuedHis steps, a wondrous multitude,And turned obeisant when the sageHad reached his shady hermitage.

Then came Nis'ákar to my side
And looked with wondering eyes, and cried:'I knew thee not, so dire a changeHas made thy form and feature strange.Where are thy glossy feathers? whereThe rapid wings that cleft the air?Two vulture brothers once I knew:Each form at will could they endue.They of the vulture race were kings,And flew with Mátaris'va's  
1 wings.
In human shape they loved to greetTheir hermit friend, and clasp his feet,The younger was Jatáyus, thouThe elder whom I gaze on now.Say, has disease or foeman's hateReduced thee from thy high estate?
Footnotes
388:1b Mahendra is chain of mountains generally 
identified with part of the Gháts of the Peninsula.
Next: Canto LXI.: Sampáti's Story.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXI.: SAMPÁTI'S STORY.
'Ah me I o'erwhelmed with shame and weak
With wounds,' I cried, 'I scarce can speak.My hapless brother once and IOur strength of flight resolved to try.
And by our foolish pride impelled
Our way through realms of ether held.We vowed before the saints who treadThe wilds about Kailása's head,That we with following wings would chaseThe swift sun to his resting place.Up on our soaring pinions throughThe fields of cloudless air we flew.Beneath us far, and far away,Like chariot wheels bright cities lay,Whence in wild snatches rose the songOf women mid the gay-clad throng,With sounds of sweetest music blentAnd many a tinkling ornament.Then as our rapid wings we strainedThe pathway of the sun we gained,Beneath us all the earth was seenClad in her garb of tender green,And every river in her bed

Meandered like a silver thread.
We looked on Meru far below.And Vindhya and the Lord of Snow,Like elephants that bend to coolTheir fever in a lilied pool.But fervent heat and toil o'ercameThe vigour of each yielding frame,Our weary hearts began to quail,And wildered sense to reel and fail.We knew not, fainting and distressed,The north or south or east or west.With a great strain mine eyes I turnedWhere the fierce sun before me burned,And seemed to my astonished eyesThe equal of the earth in size.  
1b
At length, o'erpowered, Jatáyus fellWithout a word to say farewell,And when to earth I saw him hieI followed headlong from the sky.  
2b
With sheltering wings I intervenedAnd from the sun his body screened,But lost, for heedless folly doomed,My pinions which the heat consumed.ln Janasthán, I hear them say,My hapless brother fell and lay.I, pinionless and faint and weak,Dropped upon Vindhya's woody peak.Now with my swift wings burnt away,Reft of my brother and my sway.

From this tall mountain's summit I
Will cast me headlong down and die.
p. 390
Footnotes
389:1 Mátarisva is identified with Váyu, the wind.
389:1b Of course not equal to the whole earth, says the 
Commentator, but equal to Janasthán.
389:2b This appears to be the Indian form of the stories of Phaethon and Daedalus and Icarus.
Next: Canto LXII.: Sampáti's Story.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXII.: SAMPÁTI'S STORY.
'As to the saint I thus complained
My bitter tears fell unrestrained.He pondered for a while, then brokeThe silence, and thus calmly spoke:'Forth from thy sides again shall spring,O royal bird, each withered wing,And all thine ancient power and mightReturn to thee with strength of sight.A noble deed has been foretoldIn prophecy pronounced of old:Nor dark to me are future things,Seen by the light which penance brings.A glorious king shall rise and reign,The pride of old Ikshváku's strain.A good and valiant prince, his heir,Shall the dear name of Ráma bear.With his brave brother Lakshman heAn exile in the woods shall be,Where Rávan, whom no God may slay,  
1
Shall steal his darling wife away,In vain the captive will be wooedWith proffered love and dainty food,She will not hear, she will not taste:But, lest her beauty wane and waste,

Lord Indra's self will come to her
With heavenly food, and minister.Then envoys of the Vánar raceBy Ráma sent will seek this place.To them, O roamer of the air,The lady's fate shalt thou declare.Thou must not move--so maimed thou artThou canst not from this spot depart.Await the day and moment due,And thy burnt wings will sprout anew.I might this day the boon bestowAnd bid again thy pinions grow,But wait until thy saving deedThe nations from their fear have freed.Then for this glorious aid of thineThe princes of Ikshváku's line,And Gods above and saints belowEternal gratitude shall owe.Fain would mine aged eyes beholdThat pair of whom my lips have told,Yet wearied here I must not stay,But leave my frame and pass away.'
Next: Canto LXIII.: Sampáti's Story.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIII.: SAMPÁTI'S STORY.
'With this and many a speech beside.
My failing heart he fortified,
With glorious hope my breast inspired,
And to his holy home retired.I scaled the mountain height, to viewThe region round, and looked for you.In ceaseless watchings night and dayA hundred seasons passed away,And by the sage's words consoledI wait the hour and chance foretold.But since Nis'ákar sought the skies.And cast away all earthly ties,Full many a care and doubt has pressedWith grievous weight upon my breast.But for the saint who turned asideMy purpose I had surely died.Those hopeful words the hermit spake,That bid me live for Ráma's sake,Dispel my anguish as the lightOf lamp and torch disperse the night.'   He ceased: and in the Vánars' viewForth from his side young pinions grew,And boundless rapture filled his breast

As thus the chieftains he addressed:
'Joy, joy! the pinions, which the LordOf Day consumed, are now restoredThrough the dear grace & boundless mightOf that illustrious anchorite.The tire of youth within me burns,And all my wonted strength returns.Onward, ye Vánars, toil strive,And you shall find the dame alive.Look on these new-found wings, and henceBe strong in surest confidence.'   Swift from the crag he sprang to tryHis pinions in his nativie sky.His words the chieftains' doubts had stilled?And every heart with courage filled. 
1b
Footnotes
390:1 According to the promise, given him by Brahmá. 
See Book 1. Canto XIV.
Next: Canto LXIV.: The Sea.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIV.: THE SEA.
Shouts of triumphant joy outrang
As to their feet the Vánars sprang:And, on the mighty task intent,Swift to the sea their steps they bent.They stood and gazed upon the deep,Whose billows with a roar and leapOn the sea banks ware wildly hurled,--The mirror of the mighty world.There on the strand the Vánars stayedAnd with sad eyes the deep surveyed,Here, as in play, his billows rose,And there he slumbered in repose.Here leapt the boisterous waters, highAs mountains, menacing the sky,And wild infernal forms betweenThe ridges of the waves were seen.
p. 391
They saw the billows rave and swell,And their sad spirits sank and fell;For ocean in their deep despairSeemed boundless as the fields of air.Then noble Angad spake to cheer

The Vánars and dispel their fear:
'Faint not: despair should never findAdmittance to a noble mind.Despair, a serpent's mortal bite,Benumbs the hero's power and might.'   Then passed the weary night, and allAssembled at their prince's call,And every lord of high estateWas gathered round him for debate.Bright was the chieftains' glorious bandRound Angad on the ocean strand,As when the mighty Storm-Gods meetRound Indra on his golden seat.Then princely Angad looked on each,And thus began his prudent speech:'What chief of all our host will leapA hundred leagues across the deep?Who, O illustrious Vánars, whoWill make Sugriva's promise true,And from our weight of fear set freeThe leaders of our band and me!To whom, O warriors, shall we oweA sweet release from pain and woe,And proud success, and happy livesWith our dear children and our wives,Again permitted by his graceTo look with joy on Ráma's face,And noble Lakshman, and our lordThe king, to our sweet homes restored?'

   Thus to the gathered lords he spoke;
But no reply the silence broke.Then with a sterner voice he cried:'O chiefs, the nation's boast and pride,Whom valour strength and power adorn,Of most illustrious lineage born,Where'er you wilt you force a way,And none your rapid course can stay.Now come, your several powers declare.And who this desperate leap will dare?
Footnotes
390:1b In the Bengal recension the fourth Book ends 
here, the remaining Cantos being placed in the fifth.
Next: Canto LXV.: The Council.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXV.: THE COUNCIL.
But none of all the host was found
To clear the sea with desperate bound,Though each, as Angad bade, declaredHis proper power and what he dared.  
1
Then spake good Jámbavan the sage,Chief of them all for reverend age;
'I, Vánar chieftains, long ago
Limbs light to leap could likewise show,But now on frame and spirit weighsThe burthen of my length of days.Still task like this I may not slight,When Ráma and our king unite.So listen while I tell, O friends,What lingering strength mine age attends.If my poor leap may aught avail,Of ninety leagues, I will not fail.Far other strength in youth's fresh primeI boasted, in the olden time,When, at Prahláda's  
1b solemn rite,
I circled in my rapid flightLord Vishnu, everlasting God,When through the universe he trod.

But now my limbs are weak and old,
My youth is fled, its fire is cold,And these exhausted nerves to strainIn such a task were idle pain,'   Then Angad due obeisance paid,And to the chief his answer made:'Then I, ye noble Vánars, IMvself the mighty leap will try:Although perchance the power I lackTo leap from Lanká's island back'   Thus the impetuous chieftain cried,And Jámbavan the sage replied:'Whate'er thy power and might may be,This task, O Prince, is not for thee.Kings go not forth themselves, but sendThe servants who their best attend.Thou art the darling and the boast,The honoured lord of all the host.In thee the root, O Angad, liesOf our appointed enterprise;And thee, on whom our hopes depend,Our care must cherish and defend.'   Then Báli's noble son replied:'Needs must I go whate'er betide,*** For, if no chief this exploit dare,What waits us all save blank despair,--Upon the ground again to lieIn hopeless misery, fast, and die?For not a hope of life I see

If we neglect our king's decree*'
Then spoke the aged chief again:'***Now your attempt shall not be in vain,For to the task will I inciteA chieftain of sufficient might.'
p. 392
Footnotes
391:1 Each chief comes forward and says how far he 
can leap. Gaja says he can leap ten yojans. Gavaksha 
can leap twenty. Gavaya thirty.* and so on up to ninety.
391:1b Prahlá*da, the son of H***iranyakasipu, was a 
pious Datya remarkable for his devotion to Vishnu, and 
was on this account persecuted by his father.
Next: Canto LXVI.: Hanumán.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVI.: HANUMÁN.
The chieftain turned his glances where
The legions sat in mute despair;And then to Hanumán, the bestOf Vánar lords, these words addressed:'Why still, and silent, and apart,O hero of the dauntless heart?Thou keepest measured in thy mindThe laws that rule the Vánar kind,Strong as our king Sugriva, braveAs Ráma's self to slay or save,Through every land thy praise is heard,Famous as that illustrious bird,Arishtanemi's son,  
1 the king
Of every fowl that plies the wing.Oft have I seen the monarch sweepWith sounding pinions o'er the deep,And in his mighty talons bearHuge serpents struggling through the air.Thy arms, O hero, match in mightThe ample wings he spreads for flight;And thou with him mayest well compareIn power to do, in heart to dare.Why, rich in wisdom, power, and skill,O hero, mt thou lingering still?

An Apsaras  2 the fairest found
Of nymphs for heavenly charms renowned,
Sweet Punjikasthalá, becameA noble Vánar's wedded dame.Her heavenly title heard no more,Anjaná was the name she bore,When, cursed by Gods, from heaven she fellIn Vánar form on earth to dwell,New-born in mortal shape the ch*ildOf Kunjar monarch of the wild.In youthful beauty wondrous fair,A crown of jewels about her hair,In silken robes of richest dyeShe roamed the hills that kiss the sky.Once in her tinted garments dressedShe stood upon the mountain crest,The God of Wind beside her came,And breathed upon the lovely dame.And as he fanned her robe asideThe wondrous beauty that he eyedIn rounded lines of breast and limbAnd neck and shoulder ravished him;And captured by her peerless charms
He strained her in his amorous arms,
Then to the eager God she criedIn trembling accents, terrified:'Whose impious love has wronged a spouseSo constant in her nuptial vows?'

He heard, and thus his answer made:
'O, be not troubled, nor afraid.But trust, and thou shalt know ere longMy love has done thee, sweet, no wrong.So strong and brave and wise shall beThe glorious child I give to thee.Might shall be his that naught can tire,And limbs to spring as springs his sire,'Thus spoke the God; the conquered dameRejoiced in heart nor feared me shame.Down in a cave beneath the earthThe happy mother gave thee birth.Once o'er the summit of the woodBefore thine eyes the new sun stood.Thou sprangest up in haste to seizeWhat seemed the fruitage of the trees.Up leapt the child, a wondrous bound,Three hundred leagues above the ground,And, though the angered Day-God shotHis fierce beams on him, feared him not.Then from the hand of Indra cameA red bolt winged with wrath and flame.The child fell smitten on a rock.His cheek was shattered by the shock,Named Hanumán  
1b thenceforth by all
In memory of the fearful fall,The wandering Wind-God saw thee lieWith bleeding cheek and drooping eye,And stirred to anger by thy woe

Forbade each scented breeze to blow.
The breath of all the worlds was stilled,And the sad Gods with terror filledPrayed to the Wind, to calm the ireAnd soothe the sorrow of the sire.His fiery wrath no longer glowed,And Brahmá's self the boon bestowedThat in the brunt of battle noneShould slay with steel the Wind-God's son.Lord Indra, sovereign of the skies,Bent on thee all his thousand eyes,And swore that ne'er the bolt which heHurls from the heaven should injure thee,'Tis thine, O mighty chief, to shareThe Wind-God's power, his son and heir.Sprung from that glorious father thou.And thou alone, canst aid us now.This earth of yore, through all her climes,I circled one-and-twenty times,And gathered, as the Gods decreed,Great store of herbs from hill and mead,Which, scattered o'er the troubled wave.The Amrit to the toilers gave,
p. 393
But now my days are wellnigh told,My strength is gone, my limbs are old,And thou, the bravest and the best,

Art the sure hope of all the rest.
Now, mighty chief, the task assay:Thy matchless power and strength displayRise up, O prince, our second king,And o'er the flood of ocean spring.So shall the glorious exploit vieWith his who stepped through earth and sky.'  
1
He spoke: the younger chieftain heard,His soul to vigorous effort stirred,And stood before their joyous eyesDilated in gigantic size.
Footnotes
392:1 The Bengal recension calls him Arishtaneimi's 
brother "The commentator says "Arishtanemi is Aruna." 
Aruna the charioteer of the sun is the son of Kas'yapa and Vinatá and by consequence brother of Garuda called Vainat*eya from Vinatá his mother," GORRESIO.
392:2 A nymph of Paradise.
392:1b Hanu or Hanú means jaw. Haunmán or 
Hanúmán means properly one with a large jaw.

Next: Canto LXVII.: Hanuman's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVII.: HANUMAN'S SPEECH.
Soon as his stature they beheld.
Their fear and sorrow were dispelled;And joyous praises loud and longRang out from all the Vánar throng.On the great chief their eyes they bentIn rapture and astonishment,As, when his conquering foot he raised,The Gods upon Naráyan  
2 gazed.
He stood amid the joyous crowd,Bent to the chiefs, and cried aloud:'The Wind-God, Fire's eternal friend.Whose blasts the mountain summits rend,With boundless force that none may stay,Takes where he lists his viewless way,Sprung from that glorious father, IIn power and speed with him may vie,A thousand times with airy leapCan circle loftiest Meru's steep:With my fierce arms can stir the seaTill from their bed the waters fleeAnd rush at my command to drownThis land with grove and tower and town.I through the fields of air can springFar swifter than the feathered King,

And leap before him as he dies.
On sounding pinions through the skies,I can pursue the Lord of LightUprising from the eastern height,And reach him ere his course be spedWith burning beams engarlanded,I will dry up the mighty main,Shatter the rocks and rend the plain.O'er earth and ocean will I bound,And every flower that grows on ground,
And bloom of climbing plants shall show
Strewn on the ground, the way I go.Bright as the lustrous path that liesAthwart the region of the skies.  
1b
The Maithil lady will I find,--Thus speaks mine own prophetic mind,--And cast in hideous ruin downThe shattered walls of Lanká's town.'   Still on the chief in rapt surpriseThe Vánar legions bent their eyes,And thus again sage JámbavánAddressed the glorious Hanumán;'Son of the Wind, thy promise cheersThe Vánars' hearts, and calms their fears,Who, rescued from their dire distress.With prospering vows thy way will bless.The holy saints their favour lend,And all our chiefs the deed commend

Urging thee forward on thy way;
Arise then, and the task assay.Thou art our only refuge; we.Our lives and all, depend on thee.'   Then sprang the Wind-God's son the bestOf Vánara, on Mahendra's crest.And the great mountain rocked and swayedBy that unusual weight dismayed,As reels an elephant beneathThe lion's spring and rending teeth.The shady wood that crowned him shook,The trembling birds the boughs forsook,And ape and pard and lion fledFrom brake and lair disquieted.
Footnotes
393:1 Vishnu, the God of the Three Steps.
393:2 Náráyan, 'He who moved upon the waters,' is 
Vishnu. The allusion is to the famous three steps of that 
God.
393:1b The Milky Way.

Next: Book V

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
p. 394
BOOK V.  1
Next: Canto I.: Hanumán's Leap.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO I.: HANUMÁN'S LEAP.
Thus Rávan's foe resolved to trace
The captive to her hiding-placeThrough airy pathways overheadWhich heavenly minstrels visited.With straining nerve aud eager brows,Like some strong husband of the cows,In ready might he stood preparedFor the bold task his soul has dared.O'er gem-like grass that flashed and glowedThe Vánar like a lion strode.Roused by the thunder of his tread,The beasts to shady coverts fled.Tall trees he crushed or hurled aside,And every bird was terrified.Around him loveliest lilies grew,Pale pink, and red, and white, and blue,And tints of many a metal lentThe light of varied ornament.Gandharvas, changing forms at will.And Yakshas roamed the lovely hill,Aud countless Serpent-Gods were seenWhere flowers and grass were fresh and green.As some resplendent serpent takesHis pastime in the best of lakes,

So on the mountain's woody height
The Vánar wandered with delight.Then, standing on tne flowery sod,He paid his vows to saint and God.Swayambhu  
2 and the Sun he prayed,
And the swift Wind to lend him aid,And Indra, sovereign of the skies,To bless his hardy enterprise.Then once again the chief addressedThe Vánars from tke mountain crest:'Swift as a shaft from Ráma's bow
To Rávan's city will I go,
And if she be not there will flyAnd seek the lady in the sky;Or, if in heaven she be not found,Will hither bring the giant bound.'   He ceased; and mustering his mightSprang downward from the mountain height,While, shattered by each mighty limb,The trees unrooted followed him.The shadow on the ocean castBy his vast form, as on he passed,Flew like a ship before the galeWhen the strong breeze has tilled the sail,And where his course the Vánar heldThe sea beneath him raged and swelled.Then Gods and all the heavenly trainPoured flowerets down in gentle rain;

Their voices glad Gandharvas raised,
And saints in heaven the Vánar praised.Fain would the Sea his succour lendAnd Raghu's noble son befriend.He, moved by zeal for Ráma's sake,The hill Maináka  
1b thus bespake:
'O strong Maináka, heavens decreeIn days of old appointed theeTo be the Asurs bar, and keepThe rebels in the lowest deep.Thou guardest those whom heaven has cursedLest from their prison-house they burst,And standest by the gates of hellTheir limitary* sentinel.To thee is given the power to spreadOr spring above thy watery bed.Now, best of noble mountains, riseAnd do the thing that I advise,E'en now above thy buried crestFlies mighty Hanumán, the bestOf Van*sis, moved for Ráma's sakeA wonderous deed to undertake.Lift up thy head that he may stayAnd rest him on his weary way.'   He heard, and from his watery abroud,As bursts the sun from ***** cloud,Rose swifty. Crowned with plant and tree,And stood above the foamy* sea.  
2b
There with his lofty peaks apraised

Bright as a hundred suns he blazed,
And crest and crag of burnished goldFlashed on the flood that round him rolled,*
p. 395
The Vánar thought the mountain roseA hostile bar to interpose,And, like a wind-swept cloud, o'erthrewThe glittering mountain as he flew.Then from the falling hill rang outA warning voice and joyful shout.Again he raised him high in airTo meet the flying Vánar there,And standing on his topmost peakIn human form began to speak: 
1
'Best of the Vánars' noblest line,A mighty task, O chief, is thine.Here for a while, I pray thee, lightAnd rest upon the breezy height.A prince of Raghu's line was heWho gave his glory to the Sea, 
2
Who now to Rama's envoy showsHigh honour for the debt he owes.He bade me lift my buried headUprising from my watery bed,And woo the Vanar chief to restA moment on my glittering crest,Refresh thy weary limbs, and eat

My mountain fruits for they are sweet.
I too, O chieftain, know thee well;-Three worlds thy famous virtues tell;And none, I ween, with thee may vieWho spring impetuous through the sky.To every guest, though mean and low.The wise respect and honour show;And how shall I neglect thee, howSlight the great guest so near me now?Son of the Wind,'tis thine to shareThe might of him who shakes the air;And,--for he loves his offspring,--heIs honoured when I honour thee.Of yore, when Krita's age  
3 was new,
The little hills and mountains flewWhere'er they listed, borne on wingsMore rapid the feathered king's. 
4
But mighty terror came on allThe Gods and saints who feared their fall.
And Indra in his anger rent
Their pinions with the bolts he sent.When in his ruthless fury heLevelled his flashing bolt at me,The great-souled Wind inclined to save,And laid me neath the ocean's wave.Thus by the favour of the sireI kept my cherished wings entire;And for this deed of kindness done

I honour thee his noble son.
O come, thy weary limbs relieve,And honour due from me receive.''I may not rest,' the Vanar cried;'I must not stay or turn aside.Yet pleased am I, thou noblest hill,And as the deed accept thy will.'   Thus as he spoke he lightly pressedWith his broad hand the mountain's crest.Then bounded upward to the heightOf heaven, rejoicing in his might,And through the fields of boundless blue,The pathway of his father, flew.Gods, saints, and heavenly bards beheldThat flight that none had paralleled,Then to the Nagas' mother  
1b came
And thus addressed the sun-bright dame:'See, Hauum'an with venturous leapWould spring across the mighty deep,-A Viinar prince, the Wind-God's seed:Come, Suras'a, his course impede.In Rakshas form thy shape disguise,Terrific, like a hill in size:Let thy red eyes with fury glow,And high as heaven thy body grow.With fearful tusks the chief defy.That we his power and strength may try.He will with guile thy hold elude,Or own thy might, by thee subdued.'

   Pleased with the grateful honours paid,
The godlike dame their words obeyed,Clad in a shape of terror sheSprang from the middle of the sea,And, with fierce accents that appalledAll creatures, to the Vanar called:'Come, prince of Vanars, doomed to beMy food this day by heaven's decree.Such boon from ages long agoTo Brahma's favouring will I owe.'   She ceased, and Hanuman replied,By shape and threat unterrified:'Brave Rama with his Maithil spouseLodged in the shade of Dandak's boughs.Thence Ravan king of giants stoleSita the joy of Rama's soul.
p. 396
By Ráma's high behest to herI go a willing messenger;And never shouldst them hinder oneWho toils for Das'aratha's son.First captive Sítá will I see,And him who sent and waits for me,Then come and to thy will submit,Yea, by my truth I promise it.''Nay, hope not thus thy life to save;Not such the boon that Brahma gave.

Enter my mouth,' was her reply,
'Then forward on thy journey hie!'  1
'Stretch, wider stretch thy jaws,' exclaimedThe Vánar chief, to ire inflamed;And, as the Rákshas near him drew,Ten leagues in height his stature grew.Then straight, her threatening jaws between,A gulf of twenty leagues was seen.To fifty leagues he waxed, and stillHer mouth grew wider at her will.Then smaller than a thumb became,Shrunk by his power, the Vánar's frame.  
2
He leaped within, and turning roundSprang through the portal at a bound.Then hung in air a moment, whileHe thus addressed her with a smile:'O Daksha's child,  
3 farewell at last!
For I within thy mouth have passed.Thou hast the gift of Brahmá's grace:I go, the Maithil queen to trace.'Then, to her former shape restored,She thus addressed the Vánar lord:'Then forward to the task, and maySuccess and joy attend thy way!Go, and the rescued lady bringIn triumph to her lord and king.'
Then hosts of spirits as they gazed

The daring of the Vánar praised.
Through the broad fields of ether, fastGarud's royal self, he passed,The region of the cloud and rain,Loved by the gay Gandharva train,Where mid the birds that came and wentShone Indra's glorious bow unbent,And like a host of wandering starsFlashed the high Gods' celestial cars.Fierce Sinhiká  
1b who joyed in ill
And changed her form to work her will,Descried him on his airy wayAnd marked the Vánar for her prey.'This day at length,' the demon cried,'My hunger shall be satisfied,'And at his passing shadow caughtDelighted with the cheering thought.The Vánar felt the power that stayedAnd held him as she grasped his shade,Like some tall ship upon the mainThat struggles with the wind in vain.Below, above, his eye he bentAnd scanned the sea and firmament.High from the briny deep uprearedThe monster's hideous form appeared,'Sugríva's tale,' he cried,'is true:This is the demon dire to viewOf whom the Vánar monarch told,Whose grasp a passing shade can hold.'

Then, as a cloud in rain-time grows.
His form, dilating, swelled and rose.Wide as the space from heaven to hellHer jaws she opened with a yell,And rushed upon her fancied preyWith cloud-like roar to seize and slay.The Vánar swift as thought compressedHis borrowed bulk of limb and chest,And stood with one quick bound insideThe monstrous mouth she opened wide.Hid like the moon when Ráhu  
2b draws
The orb within his ravening jaws.Within that ample cavern pentThe demon's form he tore and rent,And, from the mangled carcass freed,Came forth again with thought-like speed.  
3b
p. 397
Thus with his skill the fiend he slew,Then to his wonted stature grew.The spirits saw the demon die.And hailed the Vánar from the sky:'Well hast thou fought a wondrous fightNor spared the fiend's terrific might,On, on! perform the blameless deed,And in thine every wish succeed.Ne're can they fail in whom combineSuch valour; thought, and skill as thine.'

Pleased with their praises as they sang,
Again through fields of air he sprang,And now, his travail wellnigh done,The distint shore was almost won,Before him on the margent stoodIn long dark line a waving wood,And the fair island, bright and greenWith flowers and trees, was clearly seen,And every babbling brook that gaveHer lord the sea a tribute wave.He lighted down on Lamba's peakWhich tinted metals stain and streak,And looked where Lanká's splendid townShone on the mountain like a crown.
Footnotes
394:1 This Book is called Sundar or the Beatiful. To a 
European taste it is the most intolerably tedious of the 
whole poem, abounding in repetition, overloaded description, and long aud useless speeches which impede the action of the poem. Manifest interpolations of whole Cantos also occur. I have omitted none of the action of the Book, but have occasionally omitted long passages of common-place description, lamentation, and long stories which have been again and again 

repeated.
394:2 Brahmá the Self-Existent.
394:1b Maináka was the son of Rimálaya* and Mená or 
Menaka.
394:2b Thus Milton makes the hills of heaven self-moving at command: 
'At his comma*d the uprooted hiils retired Each to his 
place, they heard his voice and went Obsequious'
395:1 The spirit of the mountain is separable from the 
mountain. Himalaya has also been represented as 
standing in human on one of his own peaks.
395:2 Sagar or the Sea is said to have derived its name 
from Sagar. The story is fully told in Book I, Cantos 
XLII, XLIII, and XLlV.
395:3 Kritu is the first of the four ages of the world, the 
golden age, also called Satya.
395:4 Parvata means a mountain and in the Vedas a cloud. Hence in later mythology the mountain have 
taken the place of the clouds as the objects of the 

attacks of Indra the Sun-God. The feathered king is 
Garuda.
395:1b "The children of Surasa were a thousand mighty 
many-headed serpents, traversing the sky." WlLSON'S 
Vishnu Purana, Vol.II. p.73.
396:1 She means, says the Commentator, pursue thy 
journey if thou can.
396:2 If Milton's spirits are allowed the power of infinite self-extension and compression the same must 
be conceded to Válmíki's supernatural beings. Given the power as in Milton the result in Válmíki is perfectly consistent.
396:3 "Daksha is the son of Brahmá and one of the 
Prajápatis or divine progenitors. He had sixty daughters, 
twenty-seven of whom married to Kas'yapa produced, according to one of the Indian cosmogonies, all mundane beings. Does the epithet, Descendant of Daksha, given to Surasá, mean that she is one of those daughters? I think not. This epithet is perhaps an appellation common to all created beings as having sprung from Daksha." GORRESIO.
396:1b Sinhiká is the mother of Ráhu the dragon's head 
or ascending node, the chief agent in eclipses.

396:2b Ráhu is the demon who causes eclipses by 
attempting to swallow the sun and moon.
396:3b According to De Gubernatis, the author of the very learned, ingenious, and interesting though too 
fanciful Zoological Mythology. Hanuman here represents the sun entering into and escaping from a cloud. The biblical Jonah, according to him, typifies the same phenomenon. Sádi, 
p. 395 speaking of sunset, says 
Yùnas andar-i-dihán-i máhi shud: Jonas was within the fish's mouth. See ADDITIONAL NOTES.
Next: Canto II.: Lanká.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO II.: LANKÁ.
The glorious sight a while he viewed,
Then to the town his way pursued.Around the Vanar as he wentBreathed from the wood delicious scent,And the soft grass beneath his feetWith gem-like flowers was bright and sweet.Still as the Vanar nearer drewMore clearly rose the town to viewThe palm her fan-like leaves displayed,Priyálas  
1 lent their pleasant shade,
And mid the lower greenery farConspicuous rose the Kovidár  
2.
A thousand trees mid flowers that glowedHung down their fruit's delicious load  
3,
And in their crests that rocked and swayedSweet birds delightful music made.And there were pleasant pools whereonThe glories of the lotus shone;And gleams of sparkling fountains, stirredBy many a joyous water-bird.
Around, in lovely gardens grew
Blooms sweet of scent and bright of hue,

And Lanká, seat of Rávan's sway,
Before the wondering Vánar lay:With stately domes and turrets tall,Encircled by a golden wall,And moats whose waters were aglowWith lily blossoms bright below:For Sitá's sake defended wellWith bolt and bar and sentinel,And Rakshases who roamed in bandsWith ready bows in eager hands.He saw the stately mansions riseLike pale-hued clouds in autumn skies;Where noble streets were broad and bright,And banners waved on every height.Her gates were glorious to beholdRich with the shine of burnished gold:A lovely city planned and deckedBy heaven's creative arhitect  
1b,
Fairest of earthly cities meetTo be the Gods' celestial seat.The Vánar by the northern gateThus in his heart began debate'Our mightiest host would strive in vainTo take this city on the main:A city that may well defyThe chosen warriors of the sky;A city never to be wonE'en by the arm of Raghu's son.Here is no hope by guile to win

The hostile hearts of those within.
'Twere vain to war, or bribe, or sowDissension mid the Vánar foe.But now my search must I pursueUntil the Maithil queen I view:And, when I find the captive dame,Make victory mine only aim.But, if I wear my present shape,How shall I enter and escapeThe Rákshas troops, their guards and spies,And sleepless watch of cruel eyes?The fiends of giant race who holdThis mighty town are strong and bold;And I must labour to eludeThe fiercely watchful multitude.I in a shape to mock their sightMust steal within the town by night,Blind with my art the demons' eyes,And thus achieve my enterprise.How may I see, myself unseenOf the fierce king, the captive queen.And meet her in some lonely place,With none beside her, face to face?'
When the bright sun had left the skies
The Vánar dwarfed his mighty size,
p. 398

And, in the straitest bounds restrained,
The bigness of a cat retained.  1
Then, when the moon's soft light was spread,Within the city's walls he sped.
Footnotes
397:1 The Buchanania Latifolia.
397:2 The Bauhinia Variegata.
397:3 Through the power that Rávan's stern 
mortifications had won for him his trees bore flowers 
and fruit simultaneously.
397:1b Vis'vakarmá is the architect of the Gods.
Next: Canto III.: The Guardian Goddess.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO III.: THE GUARDIAN GODDESS.
There from the circling rampart's height
He gazed upon the wondrous sight;Broad gates with burnished gold displayed,And courts with turkises inlaid;With gleaming silver, gems, and rowsOf crystal stairs and porticoes.In semblance of a Rakshas dameThe city's guardian Goddess came,--For she with glances sure and keenThe entrance of a foe had seen,--And thus with fury in her eyeAddressed him with an angry cry:'Who art thou? what has led thee, say,Within these walls to find thy way?Thou mayst not enter here in spiteOf Ravan and his warriors' might.'And who art thou?' the Vanar cried,By form and frown unterrified,'Why hast thou met me by the gate,And chid me thus infuriate?'   He ceased: andd Lanka made reply:'The guardian of the town am I,Who watch for ever to fulfilMy lord the Rakshas monarch's will.

But thou shalt fall this hour, and deep
Shall be thy never-ending sleep.Again he spake:'In spite of theeThis golden city will I see.Her gates and towers, and all the prideOf street and square from side to side,And freely wander where I pleaseAmid her groves of flowering trees;On all her beauties sate mine eye.Then, as I came, will homeward hie.'   Swift with an angry roar she smoteWith her huge hand the Vanar's throat.The smitten Vanar, rage-impelled,With fist upraised the monster felled:But quick repented, stirred with shameAnd pity for a vanquished dame,When with her senses troubled, weakWith terror, thus she strove to speak:'O spare me thou whose arm is strong:O spare me, and forgive the wrong.
The brave that law will ne'er transgress
That spares a woman's helplessness.Hear, best of Vanars, brave and bold,What Brahma's self of yore foretold;'Beware,' he said, 'the fatal hourWhen tbou shalt own a Vanar's power.Then is the giants' day of fear,For terror and defeat are near.'

Now, Vanar chief, o'ercome by thee,
I own the truth of heaven's decree.For Sita's sake will ruin fallOn Ravan, and his town, and all.'
Footnotes
398:1 So in Paradise Lost Satan when he has stealthily 
entered the garden of Eden assumes the form of a 
cormorant.
Next: Canto IV.: Within The City.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IV.: WITHIN THE CITY.
The guardian goddess thus subdued.
The Vanar chief his way pursued,And reached the broad imperial streetWhere fresh-blown flowers were bright and sweet.The city seemed a fairer skyWhere cloud-like houses rose on high,Whence the soft sound of tabors cameThrough many a latticed window frame,And ever and anon rang outThe merry laugh and joyous shout.From house to house the Vanar wentAnd marked each varied ornament,Where leaves aud blossoms deftly strungAbout the crystal columns hung.Then soft and full and sweet and clearThe song of women charmed his ear,And, blending with their dulcet tones,Their anklets' chime and tinkling zones.He heard the Rakshas minstrel singThe praises of their matchless king;And softly through the evening airCame murmurings of text and prayer,Here moved a priest with tonsured head,And there an eager envoy sped,

Mid crowds with hair in matted twine
Clothed in the skins of deer and kine,--Whose only arms, which none might blame,Were blades of grass and holy flame  
1b
There savage warriors roamed in bandsWith clubs and maces in their bauds,Some dwarfish forms, some huge of size.With single ears and single eyes.Some shone in glittering mail arrayedWith bow and mace and flashing blade;Fiends of all shapes and every hue,Some fierce and foul, some fair to view.
p. 399
He saw the grisly legions waitIn strictest watch at Rávan's gate,Whose palace on the mountain crestRose proudly towering o'er the rest,Fenced with high ramparts from the foe,And lotus-covered moats below.But Hanuman, unhindered, foundQuick passage through the guarded bound,Mid elephants of noblest breed,And gilded car and neighing steed.
Footnotes

398:1b Priests who fought only with the weapons of 
religion, the sacred grass used like the verbena of the 
Romans at sacred rites and the consecrated fire to consume the offering of ghee.
Next: Canto VI. : The Court.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VI.  1: THE COURT.
The palace gates were guarded well
By many a Rákshas sentinel,And far within, concealed from view,Were dames and female retinueFor charm of form and face renowned;Whose tinkling armlets made a sound,Clashed by the wearers in their glee,Like music of a distant sea.The hall beyond the palace gate,Rich with each badge of royal state,
Where lines of noble courtiers stood,
Showed like a lion-guarded wood.There the wild music rose and fellOf drum and tabor and of shell,Through chambers at each holy tideBy solemn worship sanctified.Through grove and garden, undismayed,From house to house the Vánar strayed,And still his wondering glances bentOn terrace, dome, and battlement:Then with a light and rapid treadPrahasta's  
1b home he visited,

And Kumbhakarna's  2b courtyard where
A cloudy pile rose high in air;
And, wandering o'er the hill, exploredThe garden of each Rákshas lord.Each court and grove he wandered through,Then nigh to Rávan's palace drew.She-demons watched it foul of face,Eace* armed with sword and spear and mace,And warrior fiends of every hue,A strange and fearful retinue.There elephants in many a row,The terror of the stricken foe.Huge Airávat,  
3b deftly trained
In battle-fields, stood ready chained.Fair litters on the ground were setAdorned with gems and golden net.Gay bloomy creepers clothed the walls;Green bowers were there and picture halls,And chambers made for soft delight.Broad banners waved on every height.And from the roof like Mandar's hillThe peacock's cry came loud and shrill.  
4b
Footnotes
399:1 I omit Canto V. which corresponds to chapter XI. 

in Gorresio's edition. That scholar justly observes: "The 
eleventh chapter, Description of Evening, is certainly the work of the Rhapsodists and an interpolation of later date. The chapter might be omitted without any injury to the action of the poem, and besides the metre, style, conceits and images differ from the general tenour of the poem; and that continual repetition of the same sounds at the end of each hemistich which is not exactly rime, but assonance, reveals the artificial labour of a more recent age.' The following sample will probably be enough. I am unable to show the difference of style in a translation: 
Fair shone the moon, as if to lendHis cheering light to guide a friend,And, circled by the starry host,Looked down upon the wild sea-coast.The Vánar cheiftain raised his eyes,And saw him sailing through the skiesLike a bright swan who joys to takeHis pastime on a silver lake;Fair moon that calms the mourner's pain.Heaves up the waters of the main,And o'er the *hie beneath him throwsA tender light of soft repose,The charm that clings to Mandar's hill,Gleams in the sea when winds are still,And decks the lilly's opening flower,

Showed in that moon her sweetest power.
Next: Canto VII.: Ravan's Palace.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VII.: RAVAN'S PALACE.
He passed within the walls and gazed
On gems and gold that round him blazed,And many a latticed window brightWith turkis and with lazulite.
p. 400
Through porch and ante-rooms he passedEach richer, fairer thau the last;And spacious halls were lances lay.And bows and shells, in fair array:A glorious house that matched in showAll Paradise displayed below.Upon the polished floor were spreadFresh buds and blossoms white and red,And women shone, a lovely crowd,As lightning flashes through a cloud:A palace splendid as the skyWhich moon and planets glorify:Like earth whose towering hills unfoldTheir zones and streaks of glittering gold;Where waving on the mountain browsThe tall trees bend their laden boughs,And every bough and tender spray

With a bright load of bloom is gay,
And every flower the breeze has bentFills all the region with its scent.Near the tall palace pale of hueShone lovely lakes where lilies blew,And lotuses with flower and budGleamed on the bosom of the flood.There shone with gems that flashed afarThe marvel of the Flower-named  
1 car,
Mid wondrous dwellings still confessedSupreme and nobler than the rest.Thereon with wondrous art designedWere turkis birds of varied kind.And many a sculptured serpent rolledHis twisted coil in burnished gold.Aud steeds were there of noblest formWith flying feet as fleet as storm:And elephants with deftest skillStood sculptured by a silver rill,Each bearing on his trunk a wreathOf lilies from the flood beneath.There Lakshmi,  
2 beauty's heavenly queen,
Wrought by the artist's skill, was seenBeside a flower-clad pool to standHolding a lotus in her hand.
Footnotes

399:1b One of the Rákshas lords.
399:2b The brother Rávan.
399:3b Indra's elephant.
399:4b Rávan's palace appears to have occupied the 
whole extent of ground, and to uave contained within its 
outer walls the mansions of all the great Rakshas chiefs. Ravan's own dwelling seems to have been situated within the enchanted chariot Pushpak: but the description is involved and confused, and it is difficult to say whether the chariot was inside the palace or the palace inside the chariot.
Next: Canto VIII.: The Enchanted Car.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VIII.: THE ENCHANTED CAR.
There gleamed the car with wealth untold
Of precious gems and burnished gold;
Nor could the Wind-God's son withdraw
His rapt gaze from the sight he saw,By Vis'vakarmá's  
1b self proclaimed
The noblest work his hand had framed.Uplifted in the air it glowedBright as the sun's diurnal road.The eye might scan the wondrous frameAnd vainly seek one spot to blame,So fine was every part and fairWith gems inlaid with lavish care.No precious stones so rich adornThe cars wherein the Gods are borne,Prize of the all-resistless mightThat sprang from pain and penance rite,  
2b
Obedient to the master's willIt moved o'er wood and towering hill,A glorious marvel well designedBy Vis'vakarmá's artist mind,Adorned with every fair deviceThat decks the cars of Paradise.

Swift moving as the master chose
It flew through air or sank or rose,  3b
And in its fleetness left behindThe fury of the rushing wind:Meet mansion for the good and great,The holy, wise, and fortunate.Throughout the chariot's vast extentWere chambers wide and excellent,All pure and lovely to the eyesAs moonlight shed from cloudless skies.Fierce goblins, rovers of the nightWho cleft the clouds with swiftest flightIn countless hosts that chariot drew,With earrings clashing as they flew.
Footnotes
400:1 Pushpak from pushpa a flower. The car has been 
mentioned before in Ravan's expedition to carry off 
Sitá, Book III. Canto XXXV.
400:2 Lakshmi is the wife of Vishnu and the Goddess 
of Beauty and Felicity. She rose, like Aphrodite, from 
the foam of the sea. For an account of her birth aud beauty, see Book 1. Canto XLV.

Next: Canto IX.: The Ladies' Bower.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IX.: THE LADIES' BOWER.
Where stately mansions rose around,
A palace fairer still he found,Whose royal height and splendour showedWhere Ravan's self, the king, abode,A chosen band with bow and swordGuarded the palace of their lord,Where Ráksha's dames of noble raceAnd many a princess fair of faceWhom Rávan's arm had torn awayFrom vanquished kings in slumber lay.
p. 401
There jewelled arches high o'erheadAn ever-changing lustre shedFrom ruby, pearl, and every gemOn golden pillars under them.Delicious came the tempered airThat breathed a heavenly summer there,Stealing through bloomy trees that boreEach pleasant fruit in endless store.No check was there from jealous guard,No door was fast, no portal barred;Only a sweet air breathed to meet

The stranger, as a host should greet
A wanderer of his kith and kinAnd woo his weary steps within.He stood within a spacious hallWith fretted roof and painted wall,The giant Rávan's boast and pride,Loved even as a lovely bride.'Twere long to tell each marvel there,The crystal floor, the jewelled stair,The gold, the silver, and the shineOf chrysolite and almandine.There breathed the fairest blooms of spring;There flashed the proud swan's silver wing,The splendour of whose feathers brokeThrough fragrant wreaths of aloe smoke.'Tis lndra's heaven,' the Vánar criedGazing in joy from side to side;'The home of all the Gods is this,The mansion of eternal bliss.'There were the softest carpets spread,Delightful to the sight and tread,Where many a lovely woman layO'ercome by sleep, fatigued with play.The wine no longer cheered the feast,The sound of revelry had ceased.The tinkling feet no longer stirred,No chiming of a zone was heard.So when each bird has sought her nestAnd swans are mute and wild bees rest,

Sleep the fair lilies on the lake
Till the sun's kiss shall bid them wake.Like the calm field of winter's skyWhich stars unnumbered glorify,So shone and glowed the sumptuous roomWith living stars that chased the gloom.'These are the stars,' the chieftain cried,'In autumn nights that earth-ward glide,In brighter forms to reappearAnd shine in matchless lustre here.'With wondering eyes a while he viewedEach graceful form and attitude.One lady's head was backward thrown,Bare was her arm and loose her zone.The garland that her brow had gracedHung closely round another's waist.Here gleamed two little feet all bareOf anklets that had sparkled there,Here lay a queenly dame at restIn all her glorious garments dressed,There slept another whose small handHad loosened every tie and band,In careless grace another layWide gems and jewels cast away,Like a young creeper when the treadOf the wild elephant has spreadConfusion and destruction round,And cast it flowerless to the ground.Here lay a slumberer still as death,

Save only that her balmy breath
Raised ever and anon the lacethat floated o'er her sleeping face.There, sunk in sleep, an amorous maidHer sweet head on a mirror laid,Like a fair lily bending tillHer petals rest upon the rill.Another black-eyed damsel pressedHer lute upon her heaving breast,As though her loving arms were twinedRound him for whom her bosom pined.Another pretty sleeper roundA silver vase her arm's had woundThat seemed, so fresh and fair and youngA wreath of flowers that o'er it hung.In sweet disorder lay a throngWeary of dance and play and song,Where heedless girls had sunk to restOne pillowed on anothers breastHer tender cheek half seen beneathBed roses of the falling wreath,The while her long soft hair concealedThe beauties that her friend revealed.With limbs at random interlacedBound arm and leg and throat and waist,Wreath of women lay asleepBlossoms in a careless heap.

Footnotes
400:1b Vis'vakarmá is the architect of the Gods, the 
Hephaestos or Mulciber of the Indian heaven.
400:2b Rávan in the resistless power which his long austerities had endowed him with, had conquered his 
brother Kuvera the God of Gold and taken from him his greatest treasure this enchanted car.
400:3b Like Milton's heavenly car    'Itself instinct with 
spirit.'
Next: Canto X.: Rávan Asleep.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO X.: RÁVAN ASLEEP.
Apart a dais of crystal rose
With couches spread for soft repose.Adorned with gold and gems of priceMeet for the halls of Paradise.A canopy was o'er them spreadPale as the light the moon beams shed,And female figures, 
1 deftly planned,
The faces of the sleepers fanned,There on a splendid couch, asleepOn softest skins of deer and sheep.Dark as a cloud that dims the dayThe monarch of the giants lay,Perfumed with sandal's precious scentAnd gay with golden ornament.
p. 402
His fiery eyes in slumber closed,In glittering robes the king reposedLike Mandar's mighty hill asleepWith flowery trees that clothe his steep.Near and more near the VánarThe monarch of the fiends to view,And saw the giant stretched supine

Fatigued with play and drunk with wine.
While, shaking all the monstrous frame,His breath like hissing serpents' came.With gold and glittering bracelets gayHis mighty arms extended layHuge as the towering shafts that bearThe flag of Indra high in air.Scars by Airávat's impressedShowed red upon his shaggy breast.And on his shoulders were displayedThe dints the thunder-bolt had made.  
1
The spouses of the giant kingAround their lord were slumbering,And, gay with sparkling earrings, shoneFair as the moon to look upon.There by her husband's side was seenMandodarífavourite queen,The beauty of whose youthful faceBeamed a soft glory through the place.The Vánared the dame more fairThan all the royal ladies there,And thought, 'These rarest beauties speakThe matchless dame I come to seek.Peerless in grace and splendour, sheThe Maithil queen must surely be.'
Footnotes

401:1 Women, says Válmíki. But the commentator says 
that automatic figures only are meant. Women would 
have seen Hanumán and given the alarm.
Next: Canto XI.: The Banquet Hall.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XI.: THE BANQUET HALL.
But soon the baseless thought was spurned
And longing hope again returned:'No: Ráma's wife is none of these,No careless dame that lives at ease.Her widowed heart has ceased to careFor dress and sleep and dainty fare.She near a lover ne'er would lieThough Indra wooed her from the sky.Her own, her only lord, whom noneCan match in heaven, is Raghu's son.'   Then to the banquet hall intentOn strictest search his steps he bent.He passed within the door, and foundFair women sleeping on the ground,Where wearied with the song, perchance,The merry game, the wanton dance,Each girl with wine and sleep oppressed
Had sunk her drooping head to rest.
That spacious hall from side to sideWith noblest fare was well supplied,There quarters of the boar, and hereRoast of the buffalo and deer,There on gold plate, untouched as yet

The peacock and the hen were set.
There deftly mixed with gait and curdWas meat of many a beast and bird,Of kid and porcupine and hare,And dainties of the sea and air.There wrought of gold, ablaze with shineOf precious stones, were cups of wine.Through court and bower and banquet hallThe Vánared and viewed them all;From end to end, in every spot,For Sítá but found her not.
Footnotes
402:1 Rávan fought against Indra and the Gods, and his 
body was still scarred by the wounds inflicted by the 
tusks of Indra's elephant and by the fiery bolts of the Thunderer.
Next: Canto XII.: The Search Renewed.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XII.: THE SEARCH RENEWED.
Again the Vánar chief began
Each chamber, bower, and hall to scan.In vain: he found not her he sought,And pondered thus in bitter thought:'Ah me the Maithil queen is slain:She, ever true and free from stain,The fiend's entreaty has denied.And by his cruel hand has died.Or has she sunk, by terror killed,When first she saw the palace filledWith female monsters evil mienedWho wait upon the robber fiend?No battle fought, no might displayed,In vain this anxious search is made;Nor shall my steps, made slow by shame,Because I failed to find the dame,Back to our lord the king be bent,For he is swift to punishment.In every bower my feet have been,The dames of Rávan I seen;But Ráma's spouse I seek in vain,And all my toil is fruitless pain.How shall I meet the VánarI left upon the ocean strand?

How, when they bid me speak, proclaim
These tidings of defeat and shame?How shall I look on Angad's eye?What words will JámbavánYet dauntless hearts will never failTo win success though foes assail,And I this sorrow will subdueAnd search the palace through and through,Exploring with my cautious treadEach spot as yet unvisited.'   Again he turned him to exploreEach chamber, hall, and corridor,And arbour bright with scented bloom.And lodge and cell and picture-room.
p. 403
With eager eye and noiseless feetHe passed through many a cool retreatWhere women lay in slumber drowned;But Sítá nowhere found.
Next: Canto XIII.: Despair And Hope.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIII.: DESPAIR AND HOPE.
Then rapid as the lightning's flame
From Rávan's halls the Vánar cameEach lingering hope was cold and dead,And thus within his heart he said:'Alas, my fruitless search is done:Long have I toiled for Raghu's son;And yet with all my care have seenNo traces of the ravished queen.It may be, while the giant throughThe lone air with his captive flew,The Maithil lady, tender-souled,Slipped struggling from the robber's hold,And the wild sea is rolling nowO'er Sítá of the beauteous brow.Or did she perish of alarmWhen circled by the monster's arm?Or crushed, unable to withstandThe pressure of that monstrous hand?Or when she spurned his suit with scorn,Her tender limbs were rent and torn.And she, her virtue unsubdued,Was slaughtered for the giant's food.Shall I to Raghu's son relateHis well-beloved consort's fate,

My crime the same if I reveal
The mournful story or conceal?If with no happier tale to tellI seek our mountain citadel,How shall I face our lord the king,And meet his angry questioning?How shall I greet my friends, and brookThe muttered taunt, the scornful look?How to the son of Raghu goAnd kill him with my tale of woe?For sure the mournful tale I bearWill strike him dead with wild despair.And Lakshman ever fond and true,Will, undivided, perish too.Bharat will learn his brother's fate,And die of grief disconsolate,And sad Satrughna with a cryOf anguish on his corpse will die.Our king Sugrívar found;True to each bond in honour bound.Will mourn the pledge he vainly gave,And die with him he could not save.Then Rumá his devoted wifeFor her dead lord will leave her life,And Tára, widowed and forlorn,Will die in anguish, sorrow-worn.
On Angad too the blow will fall
Killing the hope and joy of all.

The ruin of their prince and king
The Vánarsls with woe will wring,And each, overwhelmed with dark despair,Will beat his head and rend his hair.Each, graced and honoured long, will missHis careless life of easy bliss,In happy troops will play no moreOn breezy rock and shady shore,But with his darling wife and childWill seek the mountain top, and wildWith hopeless desolation, throwHimself, his wife, and babe, below.All no: unless the dame I findI ne'er will meet my Vánar,Here rather in some distant dellA lonely hermit will I dwell,Where roots and berries will supplyMy humble wants until I die;Or on the shore will raise a pyreAnd perish in the kindled fire.Or I will strictly fast untilWith slow decay my life I kill,And ravening dogs and birds of airThe limbs of Hanumánl tear.Here will I die, but never bringDestruction on my race and king.But still unsearched one grove I seeWith many a bright As'oka tree.There will I enter in, and through

The tangled shade my search renew.
Be glory to the host on high,The Sun and Moon who light the sky,The Vasus  
1 and the Maruts'  2 train,
Ádityas  3 and the As'vins  4 twain.
So may I win success, and bringThe lady back with triumphing,'
Next: Canto XIV.: The As'oka Grove.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIV.: THE AS'OKA GROVE.
He cleared the barrier at a bound;
He stood within the pleasant ground,
p. 404
And with delighted eyes surveyedThe climbing plants and varied shade,He saw unnumbered trees unfoldThe treasures of their pendent gold,As, searching for the Maithil queen,He strayed through alleys soft and green;And when a spray he bent or brokeSome little bird that slept awoke.Whene'er the breeze of morning blew,Where'er a startled peacock flew,The gaily coloured branches shedTheir flowery rain upon his headThat clung around the Vánar tillHe seemed a blossom-covered hill,  
1
The earth, on whose fair bosom layThe flowers that fell from every spray,Was glorious as a lovely maidIn all her brightest robes arrayed,He saw the breath of morning shake

The lilies on the rippling lake
Whose waves a pleasant lapping madeOn crystal steps with gems inlaid.Then roaming through the enchanted ground,A pleasant hill the Vánar found,And grottoes in the living stoneWith grass and flowery trees o'ergrown.Through rocks and boughs a brawling rillLeapt from the bosom of the hill,Like a proud beauty when she fliesFrom her love's arms with angry eyes.He clomb a tree that near him grewAnd leafy shade around him threw.'Hence,' thought the Vánar, 'shall I seeThe Maithil dame, if here she be,These lovely trees, this cool retreatWill surely tempt her wandering feet.Here the sad queen will roam apart.And dream of Ráma in her heart,'
Footnotes
403:1 The Vasus are a class of eight deities, originally 
personifications of natural phenomena.
403:2 The Maruts are the winds or Storm-Gods.

403:3 The Ádityas originally seven deities of the 
heavenly sphere of whom Varuna is the chief. The name 
Áditya was afterwards given to any God, specially to Súrya the Sun.
403:4 The As'vins are the Heavenly Twins, the Castor 
and Pollux of the Hindus.
Next: Canto XV.: Sítá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XV.: SÍTÁ.
Fair as Kailása white with snow
He saw a palace flash and glow,A crystal pavement gem-inlaid,And coral steps and colonnade,And glittering towers that kissed the skies,Whose dazzling splendour charmed his eyes.There pallid, with neglected dress,Watched close by fiend and giantess,Her sweet face thin with constant flowOf tears, with fasting and with woe;Pale as the young moon's crescent whenThe first faint light returns to men:
Dim as the flame when clouds of smoke
The latent glory hide and choke;Like Rohiní the queen of starsOppressed by the red planet Mars;From her dear friends and husband torn,Amid the cruel fiends, forlorn,Who fierce-eyed watch around her kept,A tender woman sat and wept,Her sobs, her sighs, her mournful mien,Her glorious eyes, proclaimed the queen.'This, this is she,' the Vánar cried,

'Fair as the moon and lotus-eyed,
I saw the giant Rávan bearA captive through the fields of air.Such was the beauty of the dame;Her form, her lips, her eyes the same.This peerless queen whom I beholdIs Ráma's wife with limbs of gold.Best of the sons of men is he,And worthy of her lord is she.'
Footnotes
404:1 The poet forgets that Hanumán has reduced 
himself to the size of a cat.
Next: Canto XVI.: Hanumán's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVI.: HANUMÁN'S LAMENT.
Then, all his thoughts on Sítá bent,
The Vánar chieftain made lament:'The queen to Ráma's soul endeared,By Lakshman's pious heart revered,Lies here,--for none may strive with Fate,A captive, sad and desolate.The brothers' might full well she knows,And bravely bears the storm of woes,As swelling Gangá in the rainsThe rush of every flood sustains.Her lord, for her, fierce Báli slew,Virádha's monstrous might o'erthrew,For her the fourteen thousand slainIn Janasthán bedewed the plain.And if for her Ikshváku's sonDestroyed the world 'twere nobly done.This, this is she, so far renowned,Who sprang from out the furrowed ground,  
1b
Child of the high-souled king whose swayThe men of Mithilá obey;The glorious lady wooed and wonBy Das'aratha's noblest son;And now these sad eyes look on herMid hostile fiends a prisoner.

From home and every bliss she fled
By wifely love and duty led,And heedless of a wanderer's woes,A life in lonely forests chose.This, this is she so fair of mould.Whose limbs are bright as burnished gold.
p. 405
Whose voice was ever soft and mild.Who sweetly spoke and sweetly smiled.O, what is Ráma's misery! howHe longs to see his darling now!Pining for one of her fond looksAs one athirst for water brooks.Absorbed in woe the lady seesNo Rákshas guard, no blooming trees.Her eyes are with her thoughts, and theyAre fixed on Ráma far away.'
Footnotes
404:1b Sítá 'not of woman born,' was found by King 
Janak as be was turning up the ground in preparation for 
a sacrifice, See Book II. Canto CXVIII.

Next: Canto XVII.: Sítá's Guard.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVII.: SÍTÁ'S GUARD.
His pitying eyes with tears bedewed,
The weeping queen again he viewed,And saw around the prisoner standHer demon guard, a fearful band. 
1
Some earless, some with ears that hungLow as their feet and loosely swung:Some fierce with single ears and eyes,Some dwarfish, some of monstrous size:Some with their dark necks long and thinWith hair upon the knotty skin:Some with wild locks, some bald and bare,Some covered o'er with bristly hair:Some tall and straight, some bowed and bentWith every foul disfigurement:All black and fierce with eyes of fire.Ruthless and stern and swift to ire:Some with the jackal's jaw and nose.Some faced like boars and buffaloes:Some with the heads of goats and kine,Of elephants, and dogs, and swine:With lions' lips and horses' brows,They walked with feet of mules and cows:Swords, maces, clubs, and spears they boreIn hideous hands that reeked with gore,

And, never sated, turned afresh
To bowls of wine and piles of flesh.Such were the awful guards who stoodRound Sítá in that lovely wood,While in her lonely sorrow sheWept sadly neath a spreading tree.He watched the spouse of Ráma thereRegardless of her tangled hair,Her jewels stripped from neck and limb,Decked only with her love of him.
Footnotes
405:1 Somewhat similarly has Ariosto described the 
band of monster at the gate of the city of Alcina: 
"Non fu veduta mai piú strana torma,
Piú monstruosi volti e peggio fatti;Alcun' dal collo in giú d'uomini han forma,Col viso altri di simie, altri di gatti;Stampano alcun con pié caprigni l'orma,Alcuni son centauri agili ed atti."
Orlando Furioso, Canto VI. 

Next: Canto XVIII.: Rávan.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVIII.: RÁVAN.
While from his shelter in the boughs
The Vánar looked on Ráma's spouseHe heard the gathered giants raiseThe solemn hymn of prayer and praise.--Priests skilled in rite and ritual, whoThe Vedas and their branches  
1b knew.
Then, as loud strains of music brokeHis sleep, the giant monarch woke.Swift to his heart the thought returnedOf the fair queen for whom he burned;Nor could the amorous fiend controlThe passion that absorbed his soul.In all his brightest garb arrayedHe hastened to that lovely shade.Where glowed each choicest flower and fruit.And the sweet birds were never mute.And tall deer bent their heads to drinkOn the fair streamlet's grassy brink.Near that As'oka grove he drew,--A hundred dames his retinue.Like Indra with the thousand eyesGirt with the beauties of the skies.Some walked beside their lord to holdThe chouries, fans, and lamps of gold.

And others purest water bore
In golden urns, and paced before.Some carried, piled on golden plates.Delicious food of dainty cates;Some wine in massive bowls whereonThe fairest gems resplendent shone.Some by the monarch's side displayed,Wrought like a swan, a silken shade:Another beauty walked behind,The sceptre to her care assigned.Around the monarch gleamed the crowdAs lightnings flash about a cloud.And each made music as she wentWith zone and tinkling ornament.Attended thus in royal stateThe monarch reached the garden gate,While gold and silver torches, fedWith scented oil a soft light shed.  
2b
p. 406
He, while the flame of fierce desireBurnt in his eyes like kindled fire,Seemed Love incarnate in his pride,His bow and arrows laid aside.  
1
His robe, from spot and blemish freeLike Amrit foamy from the sea,  
2
Hung down in many a loosened foldInwrought with flowers and bright with gold.

The Vánar from his station viewed,
Amazed, the wondrous multitude,Where, in the centre of that ringOf noblest women, stood the king,As stands the full moon fair to view,Girt by his starry retinue.
Footnotes
405:1b The six Angas or subordinate branches of the 
Vedas are 1. Sikshá, the science of proper articulation 
and pronunciation: 2. Chhandas,metre: 3. Vyakarana, linguistic analysis or grammar: 4. Nirukta, explanation of difficult Vedic words: 5. Jyotisha, Astronomy, or rather the Vedic Calendar: 6. Kalpa, ceremonial.
405:2b There appears to be some confusion, of time 
here. It was already morning when Hanumán entered 
the grove, and the torches would be needless.
Next: Canto XIX.: Síta's Fear.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIX.: SÍTA'S FEAR.
Then o'er the lady's soul and frame
A sudden fear and trembling came,When, glowing in his youthful pride,She saw the monarch by her side.Silent she sat, her eyes depressed,Her soft arms folded o'er her breast,And,--all she could,--her beauties screenedFrom the bold gazes of the fiend.There where the wild she-demons keptTheir watch around, she sighed and wept.Then, like a severed bough, she layProne on the bare earth in dismay.The while her thoughts on love's fleet wingsFlew to her lord the best of kings.She fell upon the ground, and thereLay struggling with her wild despair,Sad as a lady born againTo misery and woe and pain,Now doomed to grief and low estate,Once noble fair and delicate:Like faded light of holy lore,Like Hope when all her dreams are o'er;Like ruined power and rank debased,Like majesty of kings disgraced:

Like woman *** led by erring slips,
The moon that labors in eclipseA pool with all her lillies* deadAn army when its king has fled:So sad and helpless wan and worn,She lay among the fiends forlorn.
Footnotes
406:1 Rávan is one of those beings who can 'limb* 
them as they will' and can of course assume the 
loveliest form to please human eyes as well as the terrific* shape that sits * the king of the Rákshas.
406:2 White and lovely as the Arant or nectar recovered 
from the depths of the Milky Sea when churned by the 
assembled Gods. See Book I. Canto XLV.
Next: Canto XX.: Rávan's Wooing.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XX.: RÁVAN'S WOOING.
With amorous look and soft address
The fiend began his suit to press:'Why wouldst thou, lady lotus-eyed,From my fond glance those beauties hide?Mine eager suit no more repel:But love me, for I love thee well.Dismiss, sweet dame, dismiss thy fear;No giant and no man is near.Ours is the right by force to seizeWhat dames soe'er our fancy please.  
1b
But I with rude hands will not touchA lady whom I love so much.Fear not, dear queen: no fear is nigh:Come, on thy lover's love rely.Some little sign of favor show,Nor lie enamoured of thy woe.Those limbs upon that cold earth laid.Those tresses twined in single braid,  
2b
The fast and woe that wear thy frame,Beseem not thee, O beauteous dame.For thee the fairest wreaths were meant,The sandal and the aloe's scent,Rich ornaments and pearls of price,

And vesture meet for Paradise.
With dainty cates shouldst thou be fed,And rest upon a sumptuous bed.And festive joys to thee belong,The music, and the dance and song.Rise, pearl of women, rise and deckWith gems and chains thine arms and neck.Shall not the dame I love be seenIn venture worthy of a queen?Methinks when thy sweet form was madeHis hand the wise Creator stayed;For never more did he designA beauty meet to rival thine.Come, let, us love while we yet may,For youth will fly and charms decay.Come cast thy *** fear asideAnd to my lo*e, my chosen bride.The gem*s and jewels that my handsHas reft from every plundered land,--To thee I give th*** this dayAnd at thy feet my kingdom lay.
p. 407
The broad rich earth will I o'errun,And leave no town unconquered, none;Then of the whole an offering makeTo Janak, 
1 dear, for thy sweet sake.
In all the world no power I see

Of God or man can strive with me.
Of old the Gods and Asurs setIn terrible array I met:Their scattered hosts to earth I beat,And trod their flags beneath my feet.Come, taste of bliss and drink thy fill,And rule the slave who serves thy will.Think not of wretched Ráma: heIs less than nothing now to thee.Stript of his glory, poor, dethroned,A wanderer by his friends disowned,On the cold earth he lays his head,Or is with toil and misery dead.And if perchance he lingers yet.His eyes on thee shall ne'er be set.Could he, that mighty monarch, whoWas named Hiranyakas'ipu.Could he who wore the garb of goldWin Glory back from Indra's hold?  
2
O lady of the lovely smile,Whose eyes the sternest heart beguile,In all thy radiant beauty dressedMy heart and soul thou ravishest.What though thy robe is soiled and worn,And no bright gems thy limbs adorn,Thou unadorned art dearer farThan all my loveliest consorts are.My royal home is bright and fair;A thousand beauties meet me there.

But come, my glorious love, and be
The queen of all those dames and me.'
Footnotes
406:1b Rávan in his magic car carrying off the most 
beautiful women reminds us of the magician in Orlando 
Furioso, possesor of the flying horse. 
"Volando talor s'aza ne le stelle, *E por quasis talor 'a terra rade'; *Bie porta con tui tutte le belle *Donna che trova perquelle contrade." *
406:2b Indian women twisted their long hair in a single 
braid as a sign of mourning for their absent husbands.
Next: Canto XXI.: Sita's Scorn.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXI.: SITA'S SCORN.
She thought upon her lord and sighed,
And thus in gentle tones replied:'Beseems thee not, O King, to wooA matron, to her husband true.Thus vainly one might hope by sinAnd evil deeds success to win.Shall I, so highly born, disgraceMy husband's house, my royal race?
Shall I, a true and loyal dame,
Defile my soul with deed of shame?'   Then on the king her back she turned,And answered thus the prayer she spurned:'Turn, Rávan, turn thee from thy sin;Seek virtue's paths and walk therein.To others dames be honour shown;Protect them as thou wouldst thine own.Taught by thyself, from wrong abstainWhich, wrought on thee, thy heart would pain.  
1b
Beware: this lawless love of thineWill ruin thee and all thy line;And for thy sin, thy sin alone,Will Lanká perish overthrown.

Dream not that wealth and power can sway
My heart from duty's path to strayLinked like the Day-God and his shine,I am my lord's and he is mine.Repent thee of thine impious deed;To Ráma's side his consort lead.Be wise; the hero's friendship gain,Nor perish in his fury slain.Go, ask the God of Death to spare,Or red bolt flashing through the air.But look in vain for spell or charmTo stay my Ráma's vengeful arm.Thou, when the hero bends his bow,Shalt hear the clang that heralds woe,Loud as the clash when clouds are rentAnd Indra's bolt to earth is sent.Then shall his furious shafts be sped,Each like a snake with fiery head.And in their flight shall hiss and flameMarked with the mighty archer's name.  
2b
Then in the fiery deluge allThy giants round their king shall fall.'
p. 408
Footnotes

407:1 Janak, king of Mithilá, was Sitá's father.
407:2 Hiranyakas'ipu was a king of the Daityas 
celebrated for his blasphemous impieties. When his 
pious son Prahlada praised Vishun the Daitya tried to kill him, when the God appeared in the incarnation of the man-lion and tore the tyrant to pieces.
407:1b Do unto others as thou wouldst they should do 
unto thee, is a precept frequently occurring in the old 
Indian poems. 
This charity is to embrace not human beings only, but 
bird and beast as well: "He prayeth best who loveth best all things both great and small"
407:2b It was the custom of Indian warriors to mark 
their arrows with their ciphers or names, and it seems to 
have been regarded as a point of honour to give an enemy the satisfaction of knowing who had shot at him. This passage however contains, if my memory serves me well, the first mention in the poem of this practice, and as arrows have been so frequently mentioned and described with almost every conceivable epithet, its occurrence here seems suspicious. No mention of, or allusion to writing has hitherto occurred in the poem.

Next: Canto XXII.: Rávan's Threat.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXII.: RÁVAN'S THREAT.
Then anger swelled in Rávan's breast,
Who fiercely thus the dame addressed:'Tis ever thus: in vain we sueTo woman, and her favour woo.A lover's humble words impelHer wayward spirit to rebel.The love of thee that fills my soulStill keeps my anger in control.As charioteers with bit and reinThe swerving of the steed restrain.The love that rules me bids me spareThy forefeit life, O thou most fair.For this, O Sítá, have I borneThe keen reproach, the bitter scorn,And the fond love thou boastest yetFor that poor wandering anchoret;Else had the words which thou hast saidBrought death upon thy guilty head.Two months, fair dame, I grant thee stillTo bend thee to thy lover's will.If when that respite time is fledThou still refuse to share my bed,My cooks shall mince thy limbs with steelAnd serve thee for my morning meal.'  
1

   The minstrel daughters of the skies
Looked on her woe with pitying eyes,And sun-bright children of the Gods  
2
Consoled the queen with smiles and nods.She saw, and with her heart at ease,Addressed the fiend in words like these;'Hast thou no friend to love thee, noneIn all this isle to bid thee shunThe ruin which thy crime will bringOn thee and thine, O impious King?Who in all worlds save thee could wooMe, Ráma's consort pure and true,As though he tempted with his loveQueen Sachí 
3 on her throne above?
How canst thou hope, vile wretch, to flyThe vengeance that e'en now is nigh,When thou hast dared, untouched by shame,To press thy suit on Ráma's dame?Where woods are thick and grass is highA lion and a hare may lie;My Ráma is the lion, thouArt the poor hare beneath the bough,Thou railest at the lord of men.But wilt not stand within his ken,
What! is that eye unstricken yet
Whose impious glance on me was set?Still moves that tongue that would not spareThe wife of Das'aratha's heir?'

   Then, hissing like a furious snake,
The fiend again to Sítá spake:'Deaf to all prayers and threats art thou,Devoted to thy senseless vow.No longer respite will I give,And thou this day shalt cease to live;Now I, as sunlight kills the morn,Will slay thee for thy scathe and scorn.'   The Rákshas guard was summoned: allThe monstrous crew obeyed the call,And hastened to the king to takeThe orders which he fiercely spake:'See that ye guard her well, and tame,Like some wild thing, the stubborn dame,Until her haughty boul be bentBy mingled threat and blandishment.'  
1b
   The monsters heard: away he strode,And passed within his queens' abode.
Footnotes
408:1 This threat in the same words occurs in Book III. 
Canto LVI.
408:2 Rávan carried off and kept in his palace not only earthly princesses but the daughters of Gods and 

Gandharvas.
408:3 The wife of Indra.
Next: Canto XXIII.: The Demons' Threats

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIII.: THE DEMONS' THREATS
Then round the helpless Sítá drew
With fiery eyes the hideous crew,And thus assailed her, all and each,With insult, taunt, and threatening speech:'What! can it be thou prizest notThis happy chance, this glorious lot,To be the chosen wife of oneSo strong and great, Pulastya's son?Pulastya--thus have sages told--Is mid the Lords of Life  
2b enrolled.
Lord Brahmá's mind-born son was he,Fourth of that glorious company.Vis'ravas from Pulastya sprang,--Through all the worlds his glory rang.And of Vis'ravas, large-eyed dame!Our king the mighty Rávan came.His happy consort thou mayst be:Scorn not the words we say to thee'   One awful demon, fiery-eyed,Stood by the Maithil queen and cried:'Come and be his, if thou art wise.Who smote the sovereign of the skies,And made the thirty Gods and three, 
3b

O'ercome in furious battle, flee.
p. 409
Thy lover turns away with scorn
From wives whom grace and youth adorn.Thou art his chosen consort, thouShall be his pride and darling now."   Another, Vikatá by name,In words like these addressed the dame:The king whose blows, in fury dealt,The Nágas  
1 and Gandharvas  2 felt,
In battle's fiercest brunt subdued,Has stood by thee and humbly wooed.And wilt thou in thy folly missThe glory of a love like this?Scared by his eye the sun grows chill,The wanderer wind is hushed and still.The rains at his command descend,And trees with new-blown blossoms bend.His word the hosts of demons fear.And wilt thou, dame, refuse to hear?Be counselled; with his will comply,Or, lady, thou shalt surely die.'
Footnotes

408:1b These four lines have occurred before. Book III. 
Canto LVI.
408:2b Prajápatis are the ten lords of created beings first created by Brahmá; somewhat like the Demiurgi of the 
Gnostics.
408:3b "This is the number of the Vedic divinities 
mentioned in the Rig-veda. In p. 409 Ashtaka I. Súkta 
XXXIV. the Rishi Hiranyastúpa invoking the As'vins 
says: À Násatyá tribhirekádasair iha devebniryátam: "O Násatyas (As'vins) come hither with the thrice eleven Gods," And in Súkta XLV. the Rishi Praskanva addressing his hymn to Agni (ignis, fire), thus invokes him: "Lord of the red steeds, propitiated by our prayers lead hither the thirty-three Gods." This number must certainly have been the actual number in the early days of the Vedic religion: although it appears probable enough that the thirty-three Vedic divinities could not then be found co-ordinated in so systematic a way as they were arranged more recently by the authors of the Upanishads. In the later ages of Bramanism the number went on increasing without measure by successive mythical and religious creations which peopled the Indian Olympus with abstract beings of every kind. But through lasting veneration of the word of tha Veda the custom regained of giving the name of "the thirty-three Gods" to the immense phalanx of the multiplied 

deities." GORRESIO.
409:1 Serpent-Gods who dwell in the regions under the 
earth.
409:2 In the mythology of the epics the Gandharvas are the heavenly singers or musicians who form the 
orchestra at the banquets of the Gods, and they belong to the heaven of India in whose battles they share.
Next: Canto XXIV.: Sítá's Reply.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIV.: SÍTÁ'S REPLY.
Still with reproaches rough and rude
Those fiends the gentle queen pursued:What! can so fair a life displease,To dwell with him in joyous ease?Dwell in his bowers a happy queenIn silk and gold and jewels' sheen?Still must thy woman fancy clingTo Ráma and reject our king?Die in thy folly, or forgetThat wretched wandering anchoret.Come, Sita, in luxurious bowersSpend with our lord thy happy hours;The mighty lord who makes his ownThe treasures of the worlds o'erthrown.'
Then, as a tear bedewed her eye,
The hapless lady made reply:'I loathe, with heart and soul detestThe shameful life your words suggest.Eat, if you will, this mortal frame:My soul rejects the sin and shame.A homeless wanderer though he be,In him my lord, my life I see,And, till my earthly days be done,

Will cling to great Ikshváku's son.
Then with fierce eyes on Sítá set
They cried again with taunt and threat:Each licking with her fiery tongueThe lip that to her bosom hung,And menacing the lady's lifeWith axe, or spear or murderous knife:'Hear, Sítá, and our words obey.Or perish by our hands to-day,Thy love for Raghu's son forsake,And Rávan for thy husband take,Or we will rend thy limbs apartAnd banquet on thy quivering heart.Now from her body strike the head,And tell the king the dame is dead.Then by our lord's commandment sheA banquet for our band shall be.Come, let the wine be quickly broughtThat frees each heart from saddening thought.Then to the western gate repair,And we will dance and revel there.'
Next: Canto XXV.: Sítá's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXV.: SÍTÁ'S LAMENT.
On the bare earth the lady sank,
And trembling from their presence shrankLike a strayed fawn, when night is dark,And hungry wolves around her bark.
p. 410
Then to a shady tree she crept,And thought upon her lord and wept.By fear and bitter woe oppressedShe bathed the beauties of her breastWith her hot tears' incessant flow,And found no respite from her woe.As shakes a plantain in the breezeShe shook, and fell on trembling knees;While at each demon's furious lookHer cheek its native hue forsook.She lay and wept and made her moanIn sorrow's saddest undertone,And, wild with grief, with fear appalled,On Ráma and his brother called:'O dear Kaus'alyá, 
1 hear me cry!
Sweet Queen Sumitrá  2, list my sigh!

True is the saw the wise declare:
Death comes not to relieve despair.'Tis vain for dame or man to pray;Death will not hear before his day;Since I, from Ráma's sight debarred,And tortured by my cruel guard,Still live in hopeless woe to grieveAnd loathe the life I may not leave.Here, like a poor deserted thing,My limbs upon the ground I fling,And, like a bark beneath the blast,Shall sink oppressed with woes at last.Ah, blest are they, supremely blest,Whose eyes upon my lord may rest;Who mark his lion, port, and hearHis gentle speech that charms the ear.Alas, what antenatal crime,What trespass of forgotten timeWaighs on my soul, and bids me bowBeneath this load of misery now?'
Next: Canto XXVI.: Sitá's Lament

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVI.: SITÁ'S LAMENT
'I Ráma's wife, on that sad day.
By Rávan's arm was borne away,Seized, while I sat and feared no ill,By him who wears each form at will,A helpless captive, left forlornTo demons' threats and taunts and scorn,Here for my lord I weep and sigh,And worn with woe would gladly die.For what is life to me afarFrom Ráma of the mighty car?The robber in his fruitless sinWould hope his captives love to win.My meaner foot shall never touchThe demon whom I loathe so much.The senseless fool! he knows me not,Nor the proud soul his love would blot.
Yea, limb from limb will I be rent,
But never to his prayer consent;Be burnt and perish in the fire,But never meet his base desire.My lord was grateful, true and wise,And looked on woe with piting eyes;But now, recoiling from the strife

He pities not his captive wife.
Alone in Janasthán he slewThe thousands of the Rákshas crew.His arm was strong, his heart was brave,Why comes he not to free and save?Why blame my lord in vain surmiseHe knows not where his lady lies.O, if he knew, o'er land and seaHis feet were swift to set me free;This Lanká, girdled by the deep.Would fall consumed, a shapeless heap,And from each ruined home would riseA Rákshas widow's groans and cries.'
Footnotes
410:1 The mother of Ráma.
410:2 The mother of Lakshman.
Next: Canto XXVII.: Trijatá's Dream.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVII.: TRIJATÁ'S DREAM.
Their threats unfeared, their counsel spurned,
The demons' breasts with fury burned.Some sought the giant king to bearThe tale of Sita's fixt despair.With threats and taunts renewed the restAround the weeping lady pressed.But Trijatá, of softer mould,A Rákshas matron wife and old,With pity for the captive moved,In words like these the fiends reproved:"Me, me,' she cried,'eat me, but spareThe spouse of Das'aratha's heirLast night I dreamt a dream; and stillThe fear and awe my bosom chill;For in that dream I saw foreshown,Our race by Ráma's hand o'erthrown.I saw a chariot high in the air,Of ivory exceeding fair.A hundred steeds that chariot drewAs swiftly through the clouds it flew,And, clothed in white, with wreaths that shone,The sons of Raghu rode thereon,I looked and saw this lady here,Clad in the purest white, appear

High on the snow white hill whose feet
The angry waves of ocean beat.And she and Ráma met at lastLike light and sun when night is past,Again I saw them side by side.On Rávan's car they seemed to ride,And with the princely Lakshman fleeTo northern realms beyond the sea.
p. 411
Then Rávan, shaved and shorn, besmearedWith oil from head to foot, appeared.He quaffed, he raved: his robes were red:Fierce was his eye, and bare his head.I saw him from his chariot thrust;I saw him rolling in the dust.A woman came and dragged awayThe stricken giant where he lay,And on a car which asses drewThe monarch of our race she threw,He rose erect, he danced and laughed,With thirsty lips the oil he quaffed,Then with wild eyes and streaming mouthSped on the chariot to the south.  
1
Then, dropping oil from every limb,His sons the princes followed him,And Kumbhakarna,  
2 shaved and shorn,
Was southward on a camel borne.

Then royal Lanká reeled and fell
With gate and tower and citadel,This ancient city, far-renowned:All life within her walls was drowned;And the wild waves of ocean rolledO'er Lanká and her streets of gold.Warned by these signs I bid you fly;Or by the hand of Ráma die,Whose vengeance will not spare the lifeOf one who vexed his faithful wife.Your bitter taunts and threats forgo:Comfort the lady in her woe,And humbly pray her to forgive;For so you may be spared and live,'
Next: Canto XXX.: Hanumán's Deliberation.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXX. 3: HANUMÁN'S 
DELIBERATION.
The Vánar watched concealed: each word
Of Sítá and the fiends he heard,
And in a maze of anxious thought
His quick-conceiving bosom wrought.'At length my watchful eyes have seen,Pursued so long, the Maithil queen,Sought by our Vánar hosts in vainFrom east to west, from main to main,A cautious spy have I exploredThe palace of the Rákhshas lord,And thoroughly learned, concealed from sight,The giant monarch's power and might.And now my task must be to cheerThe royal dame who sorrows here.For if I go, and sooth her not,A captive in this distant spot,She, when she finds no comfort nigh,Will sink beneath her woes and die.How shall my tale, if unconsoledI leave her. be to Ráma told?How shall I answer Raghu's son,

'No message from my darling, none!'
The husband's wrath, to fury fanned,Will scorch me lifeless where I stand,Or if I urge my lord the kingTo Lanká's isle his hosts to bring,In vain will be his zeal, in vainThe toil, the danger, and the pain.Yea, this occasion must I seizeThat from her guard the lady frees,  
1b
To win her ear with soft addressAnd whisper hope in dire distress.Shall I, a puny Vánar, chooseThe Sanskrit men delight to use?If. as a man of Bráhman kind,I speak the tongue by rules refined.The lady, yielding to her fears,Will think 'tis Rávan's voice she hears.I must assume my only plan--The language of a common  
2b man.
Yet, if the lidy sees me nigh,
second passage, may perhaps be understood
not a language in which words differentfrom Sanskrit were used, but the employmentof formal and elaborate diction,MUIR'S Sanskrit Texts, Part II. p. 166.}
p. 412

In terror she will start and cry;
And all the demon band, alarmed,Will come with various weapons armed.With their wild shouts the grove will fill.And strive to take me, or to kill.And, at my death or capture, diesThe hope of Ráma's enterprise.For none can leap, save only me,A hundred leagues across the sea.It is a sin in me, I own,To talk with Janak's child alone.Yet greater is the sin if IBe silent, and the lady die.First I will utter Ráma's name.And laud the hero's gifts and fame.Perchance the name she holds so dearWill soothe the faithful lady's fear.'
Footnotes
411:1 In the south is the region of Yama the God of 
Death, the place of departed spirits.
411:2 Kumbhakarna was one of Rávan's brothers.
411:3 I omit the 28th and 29th Cantos as an 

unmistakeable interpolation. Instead of advancing the 
story it goes back to Canto XVII. containing a lamentation of Sítá after Rávan has left her, and describes the the auspicious signs sent to cheer her, the throbbing of her left eye, arm, and side. The Canto is found in the Bengal recension. Gorresio translates it. and observes: "I think that Chapter XXVIII.--The Auspicious Signs--is an addition, a later interpolation by the Rhapsodists. It has no bond of connexion either with what precedes or follows it, and may be struck out not only without injury to, but positively to the advantage of the poem. The metre in which this chapter is written differs from that which is generally adopted in the course of the poem.'
411:1b The guards are still in the grove, but they are 
asleep; and Sítá has crept to a tree at some distance 
from them.
411:2b "As the reason assigned in these passages for not 
addressing Sítá in Sanskrit such as a Bráhman would 
use is not that she would not understand it, but that it would alarm her and be unsuitable to the speaker, we must take them as indicating that Sanskrit, if not spoken by women of the upper classes at the time when the Rámáyana was written (whenever that may have been), was at least understood by them, and was commonly spoken by men of the priestly class, and other educated persons, By the Sanskrit proper to 
p. 412 an [ordinary

Next: Canto XXXI.: Hanumán's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXI.: HANUMÁN'S SPEECH.
Then in sweet accents low and mild
The Vánar spoke to Janak's child:'A noble king, by sin unstained,The mighty Das'aratha reigned.Lord of the warrior's car and steed,The pride of old Ikshváku's seed.A faithful friend, a blameless king.Protector of each living thing.A glorious monarch, strong to save,Blest with the bliss he freely gave,His son, the best of all who knowThe science of the bended bow,Was moon-bright Ráma, brave and strongWho loved the right and loathed the wrongWho ne'er from kingly duty swerved,Loved by the lands his might preserved.His feet the path of law pursued;His arm rebellious foes subdued.His sire's command the prince obeyedAnd, banished, sought the forest shade,Where with his wife and brother heWandered a saintly devotee.There as he roamed the wilds he slewThe bravest of the Rákshas crew.

The giant king the prince beguiled,
And stole his consort, Janak's child.Then Ráma roamed the country round,And a firm friend, Sugríva, found,Lord of the Vánar race, expelledFrom his own realm which Báli held,He conquered Báli and restoredThe kingdom to the rightful lord.Then by Sugríva's high decreeThe Vánarlegions searched for thee,Sampáti's counsel bade me leapA hundred leagues across the deep.And now my happy eyes have seenAt last the long-sought Maithil queen.Such was the form, the eye, the graceOf her whom Ráma bade me trace.'
He ceased: her flowing locks she drew
To shield her from a stranger's view;Then, trembling in her wild surprise,Raised to the tree her anxious eyes.
Next: Canto XXXII.: Sítá's Doubt.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXII.: SÍTÁ'S DOUBT.
Her eyes the Maithil lady raised
And on the monkey speaker gazed.She looked, and trembling at the sightWept bitter tears in wild affright.She shrank a while with fear distraught,Then, nerved again, the lady thought:'Is this a dream mine eyes have seen,This creature, by our laws unclean?O, may the Gods keep Ráma, still,And Lakshman, and my sire, from ill!It is no dream: I have not slept,But, trouble-worn, have watched and weptAfar from that dear lord of mineFor whom in ceaseless woe I pine,No art may soothe my wild distressOr lull me to forgetfulness.I see but him: my lips can frameNo syllable but Ráma's name.Each sight I see, each sound I hear,Brings Ráma to mine eye or ear,The wish was in my heart, and henceThe sweet illusion mocked my sense.'Twas but a phantom of the mind,And yet the voice was soft and kind

Be glory to the Eternal Sire,  1
Be glory to the Lord of Fire,
The mighty Teacher in the skies,  2
And Indra with his thousand eyes,And may they grant the truth to beE'en as the words that startled me.'
p. 413
Footnotes
412:1 Svayambhu, the Self-existent, Brahmá.
412:2 Vrihaspati or Váchaspati, the Lord of Speech and 
preceptor of the Gods.
Next: Canto XXXIII.: The Colloquy.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIII.: THE COLLOQUY.
Down from the tree Hanumán came
And humbly stood before the dame.Then joining reverent palm to palmAddressed her thus with words of balm:'Why should the tears of sorrow rise,Sweet lady, to those lovely eyes,As when the wind-swept river floodsTwo half expanded lotus buds?Who art thou, O most fair of face?Of Asur, 
1 or celestial race?
Did Nága mother give thee birth?For sure thou art no child of earth.Do Rudras  
2 claim that heavenly form?
Or the swift Gods  3 who ride the storm?
Or art thou Rohiní  4 the blest,
That star more lovely than the rest,--Reft from the Moon thou lovest wellAnd doomed a while on earth to dwell?Or canst thou, fairest wonder, beThe starry queen Arundhatí, 
5
Fled in thy wrath or jealous prideFrom her dear lord Vas'ishtha's side?Who is the husband, father, son

Or brother, O thou loveliest one,
Gone from this world in heaven to dwell,For whom those eyes with weeping swell?Yet, by the tears those sweet eyes shed,Yet, by the earth that bears thy tread, 
6
By calling on a monarch's name,No Goddess but a royal dame.Art thou the queen, fair lady, say,Whom Rávan stole and bore away?Yea, by that agony of woe,That form unrivalled here below,That votive garb, thou art, I ween,King Janak's child and Ráma's queen.'
Hope at the name of Ráma woke,
And thus the gentle lady spoke:'I am that Sítá wooed and wonBy Das'aratha's royal son,The noblest of Ikshváku's line;And every earthly joy was mine.But Ráma left his royal homeIn Dandak's tangled wilds to roam.Where with Sumitrá's son and me,He lived a saintly devotee.The giant Rávan came with guileAnd bore me thence to Lanká's isle.Some respite yet the fiend allows,Two months of life, to Ráma's spouse.Two moons of hopeless woe remain.

And then the captive will be slain.'
Footnotes
413:1 The Asurs were the fierce enemies of the Gods.
413:2 The Rudras are manifestations of S'iva.
413:3 The Maruts or Storm Gods.
413:4 Rohiní is an asterism personified as the daughter 
of Daksha and the favourite wife of the Moon. The 
chief star in the constellation is Aldebaran.
413:5 Arundhatí was the wife of the great sage 
Vas'ishtha, and regarded as the pattern of conjugal 
excellence. She was raised to the heavens as one of the Pleiades.
413:6 The Gods do not shed tears; nor do they touch the 
ground when they walk or stand. Similarly Milton's 
angels marched above the ground and "the passive air upbore their nimble tread." 
Virgil's 'vera incessu patuit dea' may refer to the same 

belief.
Next: Canto XXXIV.: Hanumán's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIV.: HANUMÁN'S SPEECH.
Thus spoke the dame in mournful mood,
And Hanumán his speech renewed:'O lady, by thy lord's decreeI come a messenger to thee.Thy lord is safe with steadfast friends,And greeting to his queen he sends,And Lakshman, ever faithful bowsHis reverent head to Ráma's spouse.'   Through all her frame the rapture ran,As thus again the dame began:'Now verily the truth I knowOf the wise saw of long ago:'Once only in a hundred yearsTrue joy to living man appears.'   He marked her rapture-beaming hue,And nearer to the lady drew,But at each onward step he tookSuspicious fear her spirit shook.'Alas, Alas,' she cried in fear.'False is the tale I joyed to hear.'Tis Rávan, 'tis the fiend, who triesTo mock me with a new disguise.If thou, to wring my woman's heart,Hast changed thy shape by magic art,

And wouldst a helpless dame beguile,
The wicked deed is doubly vile.But no: that fiend thou canst not be:Such joy I had from seeing thee.But if my fancy does not err,And thou art Ráma's messenger,The glories of my lord repeat:For to these ears such words are sweet.   The Vánar knew the lady's thought, 
1b
And gave the answer fondly sought:
p. 414
'Bright as the sun that lights the skyDear as the Moon to every eye.He scatters blessings o'er the landLike bounties from Vais'ravan's  
1 hand.
Like Vishnu strong and unsubdued,Unmatched in might and fortitude.Wise, truthful as the Lord of Speech,With gentle words he welcomes each.Of noblest mould and form is he,Like love's incarnate deity.He quells the fury of the foe,And strikes when justice prompts the blow.Safe in the shadow of his armThe world is kept from scathe and harm.Now soon shall Rávan rue his theft,And fall, of realm and life bereft.

For Ráma's wrathful hand shall wing
His shafts against the giant king.The day, O Maithil Queen, is nearWhen he and Lakshman will he here,And by their side Sugríva leadHis countless hosts of Vánar breed.Sugríva's servant, I, by nameHanúmán, by his order came.With desperate leap I crossed the seaTo Lanká's isle in search of thee,No traitor, gentle dame, am I:Upon my word and faith rely.'
Footnotes
413:1b That a friend of Rama would praise him as he 
should be praised, and that if the stranger were Rávan in 
disguise he would avoid the subject.
Next: Canto XXXV.: Hanuman's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXV.: HANUMAN'S SPEECH.
With joyous heart she heard him tell
Of the great lord she loved so well,And in sweet accents, soft and low,Spoke, half forgetful of her woe:'How didst thou stand by Ráma's side?How came my lord and thou allied?How met the people of the woodWith men on terms of brotherhood?Declare each grace and regal signThat decks the lords of Raghu's line.Each circumstance and look relateTell Ráma's form and speech, and gait.'   'Thy fear and doubt,' he cried, 'dispelled,Hear, lady, what mine eyes beheld.Hear the imperial signs that graceThe glory of Ikshváku's race.With moon-bright face and lotus eyes,Most beautiful and good and wise,With sun-like glory round his head,Long-suffering as the earth we tread,He from all foes his realm defends.Yea, o'er the world his care extends.He follows right in all his ways,And ne'er from royal duty strays.

He knows the lore that strengthens kings;
His heart to truth and honour clings.Each grace and gift of form and mindAdorns that prince of human kind;And virtues like his own endueHis brother ever firm and true.O'er all the land they roamed distaught,And thee with vain endeavour sought,Until at length their wandering feetTrod wearily our wild retreat.Our banished king Sugríva spiedThe princes from the mountain side.By his command I sought the pairAnd led them to our monarch there.Thus Ráma and Sugríva met,And joined the bonds that knit them yet,When each besought the other's aid,And friendship and alliance made.An arrow launched from Ráma's bowLaid Báli dead, Sugríva's foe.Then by commandment of our lordThe Vánar hosts each land explored.We reached the coast: I crossed the seaAnd found my way at length to thee.'  
1b
Footnotes

414:1 Kuvera the God of Gold.
Next: Canto XXXVI.: Ráma's Ring.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVI.: RÁMA'S RING.
'Receive,' he cried, 'this precious ring,  2b
Sure token from thy lord the king:
The golden ring he wont to wear:See, Ráma's name engraven there.'Then, as she took the ring he showed,The tears that spring of rapture flowed.She seemed to touch the hand that sentThe dearly valued ornament,And with her heart again at ease,Replied in gentle words like these:'O thou, whose soul no fears deter.Wise, brave, and faithful messenger!And hast thou dared, o'er wave and foam,To seek me in the giants' home!In thee, true messenger, I findThe noblest of thy woodland kind.Who couldst, unmoved by terror, brookOn Rávan, king of fiends, to look.
p. 415
Now may we commune here as friends,For he whom royal Ráma sendsMust needs he one in danger tried,

A valiant, wise, and faithful guide.
Say, is it well with Ráma still?Lives Lakshman yet untouched by ill?Then why should Ráma's hand be slowTo free his consort from her woe?Why spare to burn, in search of me,The land encircled by the sea?Can Bharat send no army outWith banners, cars and battle shout?Cannot thy king Sugríva lendHis legions to assist his friend?'   His hands upon his head he laidAnd thus again his answer made:'Not yet has Ráma learnt where liesHis lady of the lotus eyes,Or he like Indra from the skyTo S'achí's  
1 aid, to thee would fly.
Soon will he hear the tale, and then,Roused to revenge, the lord of menWill to the giants' island leadFierce myriads of the woodland breed,Bridging his conquering way, and makeThe town a ruin for thy sake.Believe my words, sweet dame; I swearBy roots and fruit, my woodland fare,By Meru's peak and Vindhva's chain,And Mandar of the Milky Main,Soon shalt thou see thy lord, though nowHe waits upon Prasravan's  
2 brow,

Come glorious as the breaking morn,
Like Indra on Airávat  3 borne.
For thee he looks with longing eyes;The wood his scanty food supplies.For thee his brow is pale and worn,For thee are meat and wine forsworn.Thine image in his heart he keeps,For thee by night he wakes and weeps.Or if perchance his eyes he closeAnd win brief respite from his woes,E'en then the name of Sítá slipsIn anguish from his murmuring lips.If lovely flowers or fruit lie sees,Which women love, upon the trees,To thee, to thee his fancy flies.And 'Sítá! O my love!' he cries.'
Footnotes
414:1b Sítá of course knows nothing of what has 
happened to Ráma since the time when she was carried 
away by Rávan, The poet therefore thinks it necessary to repeat the whole story of the meeting between Ráma and Sugríva, the defeat of Báli, and subsequent events. I give the briefest possible outline of the story.

414:2b DE GUBERNATIS thinks that this ring which 
the Sun Ráma sends to the Dawn Sítá is a symbol of the 
sun's disc.
415:1 S'achí is the loved and lovely wife of Indra, and 
she is taken as the type of a woman protected by a 
jealous and all-powerful husband.
415:2 The mountain near Kishkindhá.
415:3 Airávat is the mighty elephant on which Indra 
delights to ride.
Next: Canto XXXVII.: Sítá's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVII.: SÍTÁ'S SPEECH.
'Thou bringest me,' she cried again,
'A mingled draught of bliss and painBliss, that he wears me in his heart,Pain, that he wakes and weeps apart,O, see how Fate is king of all,Now lifts us high, now bids us fall,And leads a captive bound with cordThe meanest slave, the proudest lord,Thus even now Fate's stern decreeHas struck with grief my lord and me.Say, how shall Ráma reach the shoreOf sorrow's waves that rise and roar,A shipwrecked sailor, wellnigh drownedIn the wild sea that foams around?When will he smite the demon down,Lay low in dust the giants' town,And, glorious from his foes' defeat,His wife, his long-lost Sítá, meet?Go, bid him speed to smite his foesBefore the year shall reach its close.Ten months are fled but two remain,Then Rávan's captive must be slain.Oft has Vibhíshan,  
1b just and wise,
Besought him to restore his prize.

But deaf is Rávan's senseless ear:
His brother's rede he will not hear.Vibhíshan's daughter  
2b loves me well:
From her I learnt the tale I tell,Avindhva  
3b prudent, just, and old,
The giant's fall has oft foretold;But Fate impels him to despiseHis word on whom he most relies.In Ráma's love I rest secure,For my fond heart is true and pure,And him, my noblest lord, I deemIn valour, power, and might supreme.'   As from her eyes the waters ran,The Vánar chief again began:'Yea, Ráma, when he hears my tale,.Will with our hosts these walls assail,Or I myself, O Queen, this dayWill bear thee from the fiend away,Will lift thee up, and take thee henceTo him thy refuge and defence;Will take thee in my arms, and flee;To Ráma far beyond the sea;Will place thee on Prasravan hillWhere Raghu's son is waiting still.'
p. 416
   'How canst thou bear me hence?' she cried,'The way is long, the sea is wide.

To bear my very weight would be
A task too hard for one like thee.' 1
   Swift rose before her startled eyesThe Vánar in his native size,Like Mandar's hill or Meru's height,Encircled with a blaze of light.'O come,' he cried, 'thy fears dispel,Nor doubt that I will bear thee well.Come, in my strength and care confide,And sit in joy by Ráma's side.'   Again she spake: 'I know thee now,Brave, resolute, and strong art thou;In glory like the Lord of FireWith storm-swift feet which naught may tireBut yet with thee I may not fly:For, borne so swiftly through the sky,Mine eyes would soon grow faint and dim,My dizzy brain would reel and swim,My yielding arms relax their hold,And I in terror uncontrolledShould fall into the raging seaWhere hungry sharks would feed on me.Nor can I touch, of free accord,The limbs of any save my lord.If, by the giant forced away,In his enfolding arms I lay,Not mine, O Vánar, was the blame;What could I do, a helpless dame?Go, to my lord my message bear,

And bid him end my long despair.'
Footnotes
415:1b Vibhíshan is the wicked Rávan's good brother.
415:2b Her name is Kalá, or in the Bengal recension 
Nandá.
415:3b One of Rávan's chief councillors.
Next: Canto XXXVIII.: Sitá's Gem.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVIII.: SITÁ'S GEM.
Again the Vánar chief replied,
With her wise answer satisfied:'Well hast thou said: thou canst not braveThe rushing wind, the roaring wave.Thy woman's heart would sink with fearBefore the ocean shore were near.And for thy dread lest limb of thineShould for a while be touched by mine,The modest fear is worthy oneWhose cherished lord is Raghu's son.Yet when I sought to bear thee henceI spoke the words of innocence,Impelled to set the captive freeBy friendship for thy lord and thee.But if with me thou wilt not tryThe passage of the windy sky,
Give me a gem that I may show,
Some token which thy lord may know.'   Again the Maithil lady spoke,While tears and sobs her utterance broke:'The surest of all signs is this,To tell the tale of vanished bliss.Thus in my name to Ráma speak:

'Remember Chitrakúta's peak.
And the green margin of the rill  1b
That flows beside that pleasant hill,Where thou and I together strayedDelighting in the tangled shade.There on the grass I sat with theeAnd laid my head upon thy knee.There came a greedy crow and peckedThe meat I waitd to protectAnd, heedless of the clods I threw,About my head in circles flew,Until by darling hunger pressedHe boldly pecked me on the breast.I ran to thee in rage and griefAnd prayed for vengeance on the thief.Then Ráma  
2b from his slumber rose
And smiled with pity at my woes.Upon my bleeding breast he sawThe scratches made by beak and claw.He laid an arrow on his bow.And launched it at the shameless crow.That shaft, with magic power endued,The bird, where'er he flew, pursued,Till back to Raghu's son he fledAnd bent at Ráma's feet his head. 
3b
Couldst thou for me with anger stirredLaunch that dire shaft upon a bird,And yet canst pardon him who stoleThe darling of thy heart and soul?

Rise up, O bravest of the brave.
And come in all thy might to save.Come with the thunders of thy bow,And smite to earth the Rakshas foe.'   She ceased; and from her glorious hairShe took a gem that sparkled thereA token which her husband's eyesWith eager love would recognize.His head the Vánar envoy bentIn low obeisance reverent.And on his finger bound the gemShe loosened from her diadem.
p. 417
Footnotes
416:1 Hanumán when he entered the city had in order to 
escape observation condensed himself to the size of a 
cat.
416:1b The brook Mandákiní, not far from Chitrakúta 
where Ráma sojourned for a time.
416:2b The poet here changes from the second person to the third.

416:3b The whole long story is repeated with some 
slight variations and additions from Book II. Canto 
XCVI. I give here only the outline.
Next: Canto XLI.: The Ruin of The Grove.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLI. 1: THE RUIN OF THE GROVE.
Dismissed with every honour due
The Vánar from the spot withdrew.Then joyous thought the Wind-God's son:'The mighty task is wellnigh done.The three expedients I must leave;The fourth alone can I achieve.  
2
These dwellers in the giants' isleNo arts of mine can reconcile.I cannot bribe: I cannot sowDissension mid the Rákshas foe.Arts, gifts, address, these fiends despise;But force shall yet their king chastise.Perchance he may relent when allThe bravest of his chieftains fall.This lovely grove will I destroy,The cruel Rávan's pride and joy.The garden where he takes his easeMid climbing plants and flowery treesThat lift their proud tops to the skies,Dear to the tyrant as his eyes.Then will he rouse in wrath, and leadHis legions with the car and steedAnd elephants in long array,And seek me thirsty for the fray.

The Rákshas legions will I meet,
And all his bravest host defeat;Then, glorious from the bloody plain,Turn to my lord the king again.'   Then every lovely tree that boreFair blossoms, from the soil he tore,Till each green bough that lent its shadeTo singing birds on earth was laid.The wilderness he left a waste,The fountains shattered and defaced:O'erthrew and levelled with the groundEach shady seat and pleasure-mound.Each arbour clad with climbing bloom,Each grotto, cell, and picture room,Each lawn by beast and bird enjoyed,Each walk and terrace was destroyed.
And all the place that was so fair
Was left a ruin wild and bare,As if the fury of the blastOr raging fire had o'er it passed.
Footnotes
417:1 I omit two Cantos of dialogue. Sítá tells 
Hanumán again to convey her message to Ráma and bid 

him hasten to rescue her. Hanumán replies as before 
that there is no one on earth equal to Ráma, who will soon come and destroy Rávan. There is not a new idea in the two Cantos: all is reiteration.
417:2 The expedients to vanquish an enemy or to make 
him come to terms are said to be four: conciliation, 
gifts, disunion, and force or punishment. Hanumán considers it useless to employ the first three and resolves to punish Rávan by destroying his pleasure-grounds.
Next: Canto XLII.: The Giants Roused.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLII.: THE GIANTS ROUSED.
The cries of startled birds, the sound
Of tall trees crashing to the ground,Struck with amaze each giant's ear.And filled the isle with sudden fear.Then, wakened by the crash and cries,The fierce shefiends unclosed their eyes,And saw the Vánar where he stoodAmid the devastated wood.The more to scare them with the viewTo size immense the Vánar grew;And straight the Rákshas warders criedJanak's daughter terrifiedWhose envoy, whence, and who is he,Why has he come to talk with thee?Speak, lady of the lovely eyes,And let not fear thy joy disguise.'   Then thus replied the Maithil dameOf noble soul and perfect frame.'Can I discern, with scanty skill,These fiends who change their forms at will?'Tis yours to say: your kin you meet;A serpent knows a serpent's feet.   I weet not who he is: the sightHas filled my spirit with affright.'

Some pressed round Sítá in a ring;
Some bore the story to their king:'A mighty creature of our race,In monkey form, has reached the place.He came within the grove,' they cried,'He stood and talked by Sítá's side,He comes from Indra's court to her,Or is Kuvera's messenger;Or Ráma sent the spy to seekHis consort, and her wrongs to wreak.His crushing arm, his trampling feetHave marred and spoiled that dear retreat,And all the pleasant place which thouSo lovest is a ruin now.The tree where Sítá sat aloneIs spared where all are overthrown.Perchance he saved the dame from harm:Perchance the toil had numbed his arm.'   Then flashed the giant's eye with fireLike that which lights the funeral pyre.He bade his bravest Kinkars  
1b speed
p. 418
And to his feet the spoiler lead.Forth from the palace, at his hest,Twice forty thousand warriors pressed.Burning for battle, strong and fierce,With clubs to crush and swords to pierce,

They saw Hanúmán near a porch,
And, thick as moths around a torch,Rushed on the foe with wild attacksOf mace and club and battle-axe.As round him pressed the Rákshas crowd,The wondrous monkey roared aloud,That birds fell headlong from the sky:Then spake he with a mighty cry:'Long life to Das'aratha's heir,And Lakshman, ever-glorious pairLong life to him who rules our race,Preserved by noblest Ráma's graceI am the slave of Kosal's king, 
1
Whose wondrous deeds the minstrels sing.Hanúmán I, the Wind-God's seed:Beneath this arm the foemen bleed.I fear not, unapproached in might,A thousand Rávans ranged for fight,Although in furious hands they rearThe hill and tree for sword and spear,I will, before the giants' eyes,Their city and their king chastise;And, having communed with the dame,Depart in triumph as I came.'  At that terrific roar and yellThe heart of every giant fell.But still their king's command they fearedAnd pressed around with arms upreared.Beside the porch a club was laid:

The Vánar caught it up, and swayed
The weapon round his head, and slewThe foremost of the Rákshas crew.Thus Indra vanquished, thousand-eyed,The Daityas who the Gods defied.Then on the porch Hanúmán sprang,And loud his shout of triumph rang.The giants looked upon the dead,And turning to their monarch fled.And Rávan with his spirit wroughtTo frenzy by the tale they brought,Urged to the fight Prahasta's son,Of all his chiefs the mightiest one.
Footnotes
417:1b Kinkar means the special servant of a sovereign, 
who receives his orders immediately p. 418 from his 
master. The Bengal recension gives these Rákshases an 
epithet which the Commentator explains 'as generated in the mind of Brahmá.'
418:1 Ráma de jure King of Kosal of which Ayodhyá 
was the capital.

Next: Canto XLIII.: The Ruin of The Temple.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIII.: THE RUIN OF THE 
TEMPLE.
The Wind-God's son a temple  1b scaled
Which, by his fury unassailed,
High as the hill of Meru, stoodAmid the ruins of the wood;And in his fury thundered outAgain his haughty battle-shout:'I am the slave of Kosal's KingWhose wondrous deeds the minstrels sing.'Forth hurried, by that shout alarmed,The warders of the temple armedWith every weapon haste supplied,And closed him in on every side,With bands that strove to pierce and strikeWith shaft and axe and club and pike.Then from its base the Vánar toreA pillar with the weight it bore.Against the wall the mass he dashed,And forth the flames in answer flashed,That wildly ran o'er roofs and wallIn hungry rage consuming all.He whirled the pillar round his headAnd struck a hundred giants dead.

Then high upheld on air he rose
And called in thunder to his foes:'A thousand Vánar chiefs like meRoam at their will o'er land and sea,Terrific might we all possess:Our stormy speed is limitless.And all, unconquered in the fray,Our king Sugríva's word obey.Backed by his bravest myriads, heOur warrior lord will cross the sea,Then Lanká's lofty towers, and allYour hosts and Rávan's self shall fall.None shall be left unslaughtered; noneWho braves the wrath of Raghu's son.'
Next: Canto XLIV.: Jambumáli's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIV.: JAMBUMÁLI'S DEATH.
Then Jambumáli, pride and boast
For valour of the Rákshas host,Prahasta's son supremely brave.Obeyed the hest that Rávan gave:Fierce warrior with terrific teeth,With saguine robes and brilliant wreath.A bow like Indra's own  
2b, and store
p. 419
Of glittering shafts the chieftain bore.And ever as the string he **triedThe weapon with a roar replied,Loud as the crashing thunder sentBy him who rules the firmament.Soon as the foeman came in viewBorne on a car which asses drew.The Vánar chieftain mighty-voicedShouted in triumph and rejoiced.Prahasta's son his bow-string drew,And swift the winged arrows flew.One in the face the Vánar smote,Another quivered in his throat.Ten from the deadly weapon sent

His brawny aims and shoulders rent.
Then as he felt each galling shotThe Vánar's rage waxed fiercely hot.He looked, and saw a mass of stoneThat lay before his feet o'erthrown.The mighty block he raised and threw,And crashing through the air it flew.But Jambumah shunned the blow,And rained fresh arrows from his bow.The Vánar's limbs were red with gore:A Sál tree from the earth he tore,And, ere he hurled it undismayed,Above his head the missile swayed.But shafts from Jambumah's bowCut through it ere his hand could throw.And thigh and arm and chest and sideWith streams of rushing blood were dyed.Still unsubdued though wounded oftThe shattered trunk he raised aloft,And down with well-directed aimOn Jambumah's chest it came.There crushed upon the trampled grassHe lay an undistinguished mass,The foeman's eye no more could seeHis head or chest or arm or knee.And bow and car and steeds 
1 and store
Of glittering; shafts were seen no more.   When Jambumah's death he heard,King Rávan's heart with rage was stirred

And forth his general's sons he sent,
For power and might preeminent.
Footnotes
418:1b Chaityaprásáda is explained by the 
Commentator as the place where the Gods of the 
Rákshases were kept. Goiresio translates it by 'un grande edificio.'
418:2b The bow of Indra is the rainbow.
Next: Canto XLV.: The Seven Defeated.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLV.: THE SEVEN DEFEATED.
Forth went the seven in brave attire,
In glory brilliant as the fire.Impetuous chiefs with massive bows,The quellers of a host of foes:
Trained from their youth in martial lore,
And masters of the arms they bore:Each emulous and fiercely bold,And banners wrought with glittering goldWaved o'er their chariots, drawn at speedBy coursers of the noblest breed.On through the ruins of the groveAt Hannmán they fiercely drove,And from the ponderous bows they strainedA shower of deadly arrows rained.Then scarce was seen the Vánar's formEnveloped in the arrowy storm.So stands half veiled the Mountains' KingWhen rainy clouds about him cling.By nimble turn, by rapid boundHe shunned the shafts that rained around,Eluding, as in air he rose.The rushing chariots of his foes,The mighty Vánar undismayed

Amid his archer foemen played,
As plays the frolic wind on highMid bow-armed  
1b clouds that fill the sky,
He raised a mighty roar and yellThat fear on all the army fell,And then, his warrior soul aglowWith fury, rushed upon the foe,Some with his open hand he beatTo death and trampled with his feet;Some with fierce nails he rent and slew,And others with his fists o'erthrew;Some with his legs, as on he rushed,Some with his bulky chest he crushed:While some struck senseless by his roarDropped on the ground and breathed no more.The remnant, seized with sudden dread,Turned from the grove and wildly fled.The trampled earth was thickly strownWith steed and car and flag o'erthrown,And the red blood in rivers flowedFrom slaughtered fiends o'er path and road.
Footnotes
419:1 We were told a few lines before that the chariot 
of Jambumah was drawn by asses. Here horses are 

spoken of. The Commentator notices the discrepancy 
and says that by horses asses are meant.
Next: Canto XLVI.: The Captains.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVI.: THE CAPTAINS.
Mad with the rage of injured pride
King Ráven summoned to his sideThe valiant *** who led his host,Supreme in war and honoured most.   'Go forth,' he cried, 'with car and steed,A** **** feet this monkey lead.But watch each chance of time and placeTo seize this thing of silvan race.For from his wondrous exploits heNo monkey of the woods can be,
p. 420
But some new kind of creature meantTo work us woe, by Indra sent.Gandharvas, Nágas, and the bestOf Yakshas have our might confessed.Have we not challenged and subduedThe whole celestial multitude?Yet will you not, if you are wise,A chief of monkey race despise.For I myself have Báli known,And King Sugríva's power I own.But none of all their woodland throng

Was half so terrible and strong.'
   Obedient to the words he spakeThey hastened forth the foe to take.Swift were the cars whereon they rode,And bright their weapons flashed and glowed.They saw: they charged in wild careerWith sword and mace and axe and spear.From Durdhar's bow five arrows spedAnd quivered in the Vánar's head.He rose and roared; the fearful soundMade all the region echo round.Then from above his weight he threwOn Durdhar's car that near him drew.The weight that came with lightning speedCrushed pole and axle, car and steed.It shattered Durdhar's head and neck,And left him lifeless mid the wreck.Yúpáksha saw the warrior die,And Virúpáksha heard his cry,And, mad for vengeance for the slain,They charged their Vánar foe again.He rose in air: they onward pressedAnd fiercely smote him on the breast.In vain they struck his iron frame:With eagle swoop to earth he came,Tore from the ground a tree that grewBeside him, and the demons slew.Then Bhásakama raised his spear,And Praghas with a laugh drew near,

And, maddened at the sight, the two
Against the undaunted Vánar flew.As from his wounds the torrents flowed,Like a red sun the Vánar showed.He turned, a mountain peak to seizeWith all its beasts and snakes and trees.He hurled it on the pair: and theyCrushed, overwhelmed, beneath it lay.
Footnotes
419:1b Armed with the bow of Indra, the rainbow.
Next: Canto XLVII.: The Death of Aksha.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVII.: THE DEATH OF AKSHA.
But Rávan, as his fury burned,
His eyes on youthful Aksha  1 turned,
Who rose impetuous at his glanceAnd shouted for his bow and lance.
He rode upon a glorious car
That shot the light of gems afar.His pennon waved mid glittering goldAnd bright the wheels with jewels rolled.By long and fierce devotion wonThat car was splendid as the sun.With rows of various weapons stored;And thought-swift horses whirled their lordRacing along the earth, or roseHigh through the clouds whene'er he chose.Then fierce and fearful war betweenThe Vánar and the fiend was seen.The Gods and Asurs stood amazed,And on the wondrous combat gazed.A cry from earth rose long and shrill,The wind was hushed, the sun grew chill.The thunder bellowed from the sky,And troubled ocean roared reply.

Thrice Aksha strained his dreadful bow,
Thrice smote his arrow on the foe,And with full streams of crimson bledThree gashes in the Vánar's head.Then rose Hanumán in the airTo shun the shafts no life could bear.But Aksha in his car pursued,And from on high the fight renewedWith storm of arrows, thick as hailWhen angry clouds some hill assail.Impatient of that arrowy showerThe Vánar chief put forth his power,Again above his chariot roseAnd smote him with repeated blows.Terrific came each deadly stroke:Breast neck and arm and back he broke;And Aksha fell to earth, and layWith all his life-blood drained away.
Footnotes
420:1 Rávan's son.
Next: Canto XLVIIL: Hanumán Captured.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVIIL: HANUMÁN CAPTURED.
To Indrajit  1b the bold and brave
The giant king his mandate gave:
'O trained in warlike science, bestIn arms of all our mightiest,Whose valour in the conflict shownTo Asurs and to Gods is known,The Kinkars whom I sent are slain,And Jambumálí and his train;The lords who led our giant bandsHave fallen by the monkey s hands;With shattered cars the ground is spread,And Aksha lies amid the dead.Thou art my best and bravest: go,Unmatched in power, and slay the foe.'
p. 421
He heard the hest: he bent his head;Athirst for battle forth he sped.Four tigers fierce, of tawny hue,With fearful teeth, his chariot drew.   Hanúmán heard his strong bow clang,And swiftly from the earth he sprang,While weak and ineffective fell

The archer's shafts though pointed well.
The Rákshas saw that naught might killThe wondrous foe who mocked his skill,And launched a magic shaft to throwA binding spell about his foe.Forth flew the shaft: the mystic charmStayed his swift feet and numbed his arm.Through all his frame he felt the spell,And motionless to earth he fell.Nor would the reverent Vánar looseThe bonds that bound him as a noose.He knew that Brahmá's self had charmedThe weapon that his might disarmed.   They saw him helpless on the ground,And all the giants pressed around,And bonds of hemp and bark were castAbout his limbs to hold him fast.They drew the ropes round feet and wrists;They beat him with their hands and fists.And dragged him as they strained the cordWith shouts of triumph to their lord.  
1
Footnotes
420:1b Conqueror of lndra, another of Rávan's sons.

Next: Canto XLIX.: Rávan.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIX.: RÁVAN.
On the fierce king Hanúmán turned
His angry eyes that glowed and burned.He saw him decked with wealth untoldOf diamond and pearl and gold,And priceless was each wondrous gemThat sparkled in his diadem.About his neck rich chains were twined,The best that fancy e'er designed,And a fair robe with pearls bestrungDown from his mighty shoulders hung.Ten heads he reared,  
2 as Mandar's hill
Lifts woody peaks which tigers fill.Bright were his eyes, and bright, beneath,The flashes of his awful teeth.His brawny arms of wondrous sizeWere decked with rings and scented dyesHis hands like snakes with five long headsDescending from their mountain beds.He sat upon a crystal throneInlaid with wealth of precious stone,Whereon, of noblest work, was setA gold-embroidered coverlet,

Behind the monarch stood the best
Of beauteous women gaily dressed.And each her giant master fanned,Or waved a chourie in her hand.Four noble courtiers  
1b wise and good
In counsel, near the monarch stood,As the four oceans ever standAbout the sea-encompassed land.Still, though his heart with rage was fired,The Vánar marvelled and admired:'O what a rare and wondrous sight!What beauty, majesty, and might!All regal pomp combines to graceThis ruler of the Rákshas race.He, if he scorned not right aud law,Might guide the world with tempered awe:Yea, Indra and the Gods on highMight on his saving power rely.'
Footnotes
421:1 The sloka which follows is probably an 
interpolation, as it is inconsistent w?th the questioning 
in Canto L.: He looked on Ravan in his pride, And boldly to the monarch cried: 'I came an envoy to this place From him who rules the Vánar race.

421:2 The ten heads of Rávan have provoked much 
ridicule from European critics. It should be remembered 
that Spenser tells us of "two brethren giants" "The one of which had two heads, the other three;" and Milton speaks of the "four-fold visaged Four," the four Cherubic shapes each of which had four faces.
Next: Canto L.: Prahasta's Questions.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO L.: PRAHASTA'S QUESTIONS.
Then fierce the giant's fury blazed
As on Hanúmán's form he gazed,And shaken by each wild surmiseHe spake aloud with flashing eyes:'Can this be Nandi  
2b standing here,
The mighty one whom all revere?Who once on high Kailása's hillPronounced the curse that haunts me still?Or is the woodland creature oneOf Asur race, or Bali's  
3b son?
The wretch with searching question try:Learn who he is, and whence; and whyHe marred the glory of the grove,And with my captains fiercely strove.'
p. 422
Prahasta heard his lord's behest,And thus the Vánar chief addressed:'O monkey stranger, be consoled:Fear not, and let thy heart be bold.If thou by Indra's mandate sentThy steps to Lanká's isle hast bent,

With fearless words the cause explain,
And freedom thou shalt soon regain.Or if thou comest as a spyDespatched by Vishnu in the sky,Or sent by Yama, or the LordOf Riches, hast our town explored;Proved by the prowess thou hast shownNo monkey save in form alone;Speak boldly all the truth, and beReleased from bonds, unharmed and free.But falsehood spoken to our kingSwift punishment of death will bring.'
He ceased: the Vánar made reply;
'Not Indra's messenger am I,Nor came I hither to fulfilKuvera's hest or Vishnu's will.I stand before the giants hereA Vánar e'en as I appear.I longed to see the king--'twas hardTo win my way through gate and guard.And so to gain my wish I laidIn ruin that delightful shadeNo fiend, no God of heavenly kindWith bond or chain these herbs may bind.The Eternal Sire himself of oldVouchsafed the boon that makes me bold,From Brahmá's magic shaft released  
1
I knew the captor's power had ceased,

The fancied bonds I freely brooked,
And thus upon the king have looked.My way to Lanká have I won,A messenger from Raghu's son.'
Footnotes
421:1b Durdhar, or as the Bengal recension reads 
Mahodara, Prahasta, Mahápárs'va, and Nikumbha.
421:2b The chief attendant of S'iva.
421:3b Bali, not to be confounded with Báli the Vánar, was a celebrated Daitya or demon who had usurped the 
empire of the three worlds, and who was deprived of two thirds of his dominions by Vishnu in the Dwarf incarnation.
Next: Canto LI.: Hanumán's Reply.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LI.: HANUMÁN'S REPLY.
My king Sugriva greets thee fair,
And bids me thus his rede declare.Son of the God of Wind, by nameHanumán, to this isle I came.To set the Maithil lady freeI crossed the barrier of the sea.I roamed in search of her and foundHer weeping on that lovely ground.Then in the lore of duty trained,Who hast by stern devotion gainedThis wondrous wealth and power and fameShouldst fear to wrong another's dame.
Hear thou my counsel, and be wise:
No fiend, no dweller in the skiesCan bear the shafts by Lakshman shot,Or Ráma when his wrath is hot.O Giant King, repent the crimeAnd soothe him while there yet is time.Now be the Maithil queen restoredUninjured to her sorrowing lord.Soon wilt thou rue thy dire mistake:She is no woman but a snake,Whose very deadly bite will be

The ruin of thy house and thee.
Thy pride has led thy thoughts astray,That fancy not a hand may slayThe monarch of the giants, screenedFrom mortal blow of God and fiend.Sugríva still thy death may be:No Yaksha, fiend, or God is heAnd Ráma from a woman springs,The mortal seed of mortal kings.O think how Báli fell subdued;Think on thy slaughtered multitude.Respect those brave and strong allies;Consult thy safety, and be wise.I, even I, no helper needTo overthrow, with car and steed,Thy city Lanká half divine:The power but not the will is mine.For Raghu's son, before his friendTne Vánar monarch, strove to endWith his own conquering arm the lifeOf him who stole his darling wife.Turn, and be wise, O Rávan turn;Or thou wilt see thy Lanká burn,And with thy wives, friends, kith and kinBe ruined for thy senseless sin.'
Footnotes

422:1 When Hanumán was bound with cords Indrajit 
released his captive from the spell laid upon him by the 
magic weapon.
Next: Canto LII.: Vibhíshan's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LII.: VIBHÍSHAN'S SPEECH.
Then Rávan spake with flashing eye:
'Hence with the Vánar: let him die.Vibíshan heard the stern behest,And pondered in his troubled breast;Then, trained in arts that soothe and pleaseAddressed the king in words like these:
'Revoke, my lord, thy fierce decree,
And hear the words I speak to thee.Kings wise and noble ne'er condemnTo death the envoys sent to them:Such deed the world's contempt would drawOn him who breaks the ancient law.  
1b
Observe the mean where justice lies,And spare his life but still chastise.'
p. 423
   Then forth the tyrant's fury broke,And thus in angry words he spoke:'O hero, when the wicked bleedNo sin or shame attends the deed.The Vánar's blood must needs be spilt,

The penalty of heinous guilt.'
   Again Vibhíshan made reply:'Nay, hear me, for he must not die.Hear the great law the wise declare:'Thy foeman's envoy thou shalt spare.''Tis true he comes an open foe:'Tis true his hands have wrought us woeBut law allows thee, if thou wilt,A punishment to suit the guilt.The mark of shame, the scourge, the brand,The shaven head, the wounded hand.Yea, were the Vánar envoy slain,Where, King of giants, were the gain?On them alone, on them who sentThe message, be the punishment.For spake he well or spake he ill,He spake obedient to their will.And, if he perish, who can bearThy challenge to the royal pair?Who, cross the ocean and inciteThy death-doomed enemies to fight?'
Footnotes
422:1b "One who murders an ambassador i (rája 
*bhata) goes to Tuptakumbha, the hell of heated 
caldrons." WILSON's Vishya Purana, Vol. II pg 217. p. 

423 "It will be remembered that the envoys of King 
David had the half of their beards shaved off by Hanun, 
King of Ammon. (2 Sam. X.)" WHEELER, Hist, of India, Vol. II. 342.
Next: Canto LIII.: The Punishment.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIII.: THE PUNISHMENT.
King Rávan, by his pleading moved,
The counsel of the chief approved:   'Thy words are wise and true; to killAn envoy would beseem us illYet must we for his crime inventSome fitting mode of punishment.The tail, I fancy, is the partMost cherished by a monkey's heart. 
1
Make ready: set his tail aflame,And let him leave us as he came,And thus disfigured and disgracedBack to his king and people haste.'   The giants heard their monarch's speech;And, filled with burning fury, eachBrought strips of cotton cloth, and roundThe monkey's tail the bandage wound.As round big tail the bands they drewHis mighty form dilating grew
Vast as the flame that bursts on high
Where trees are old and grass is dry.Each hand and strip they soaked in oil,And set on fire the twisted coil.

Delighted as they viewed the blaze,
The cruel demons stood at gaze:And mid loud drums and shells rang outThe triumph of their joyful shout.They pressed about him thick and fastAs through the crowded streets he passed,Observing with attentive careEach rich and wondrous structure there,Still heedless of the eager cryThat rent the air, The spy! the spy!   Some to the captive lady ran.And thus in joyous words began:'That copper-visaged monkey, heWho in the garden talked with thee,Through Lanká's town is led a show,And round his tail the red flames glow.'The mournful news the lady heardThat with fresh grief her bosom stirred.Swift to the kindled fire she wentAnd prayed before it reverent:'If I my husband have obeyed,And kept the ascetic vows I made,Free, ever free, from stain and blot,O spare the Vánar; harm him not.'   Then leapt on high the flickering flameAnd shone in answer to the dame.The pitying fire its rage forbore:The Vánar felt the heat no more.Then, to minutest size reduced, 
1b

The bonds that bound his limbs he loosed,
And, freed from every band and chain,Rose to his native size again.He seized a club of ponderous weightThat lay before him by the gate,Rushed at the fiends that hemmed him round,And laid them lifeless on the ground,Through Lanká's town again he strode,And viewed each street and square and road,--Still wreathed about with harmless blaze,A sun engarlanded with rays.
p. 424
Footnotes
423:1 I have not attempted to tone down anything in 
this Canto. I give a faithful translation.
423:1b "Behold a wonder! they but now who seemed In bigness to surpass earth's giant sons, Now less than 
smallest dwarfs in narrow room Throng numberless." 
Paradise Lost, I, 716.

Next: Canto LIV.: The Burning of Lanká.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIV.: THE BURNING OF LANKÁ.
'What further deed remains to do
To vex the Rákshas king anew?The beauty of his grove is marred,Killed are the bravest of his guard.The captains of his host are slain;But forts and palaces remain.Swift is the work and light the toilEach fortress of the foe to spoil.'   Reflecting thus, his tale ablazeAs through the cloud red lightning plays,He scaled the palaces and spreadThe conflagration where he sped.From house to house he hurried on,And the wild flames behind him shone.Each mansion of the foe he scaled,And furious fire its roof assailedTill all the common ruin shared:Vibhíshan's house alone was spared.From blazing pile to pile he sprang,And loud his shout of triumph rang,As roars the doomsday cloud when allThe worlds in dissolution fall.The friendly wind conspired to fanThe hungry flames that leapt and ran,

And spreading in their fury caught
The gilded walls with pearls inwrought,Till each proud palace reeled and fellAs falls a heavenly citadel.   Loud was the roar the demons raisedMid walls that split and beams that blazed,As each with vain endeavour stroveTo stay the flames in house or grove.The women, with dishevelled hair,Flocked to the roofs in wild despair,Shrieked out for succour, wept aloud,And fell, like lightning from a cloud.He saw the flames ascend and curlRound turkis, diamond, and pearl,While silver floods and molten goldFrom ruined wall and latice rolled.As fire grows fiercer as he feedsOn wood and grass and crackling reeds,So Hanumán the ruin eyedWith fury still unsatisfied.
Next: Canto LV.: Fear For Sítá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LV.: FEAR FOR SÍTÁ.
But other thoughts resumed their sway
When Lanká's town in ruin lay;And, as his bosom felt their weighHe stood a while to meditate'What have I done?', he thought with shame,'Destroyed the town with hostile flame.O happy they whose firm controlChecks the wild passion of the soul;Who on the fires of anger throwThe cooling drops that check their glow.But woe is me, whom wrath could leadTo do this senseless shameless deed.The town to fire and death I gave,Nor thought of her I came to save,--Doomed by my own rash folly, doomedTo perish in the flames consumed.If I, when anger drove me wild.Have caused the death of Janak's child,The kindled flame shall end my woe,Or the deep fires that burn below, 
1
Or my forsaken corse shall beFood for the monsters of the sea.How can I meet Sugríva? howBefore the royal brothers bow,--

I whose rash deed has madly foiled.
The noble work in which we toiled?Or has her own bright virtue shedIts guardian influence round her head?She lives untouched,--the peerless dame;Flame has no fury for the flame. 
2
The very fire would ne'er consentTo harm a queen so excellent,--The high-souled Ráma's faithful wife,Protected by her holy life.She lives, she lives. Why should I fearFor one whom Raghu's sons hold dear?Has not the pitying fire that sparedThe Vánar for the lady cared?'   Such were his thoughts: he pondered long,And fear grew faint and hope grew strong.Then round him heavenly voices rang,And, sweetly tuned, his praises sang:'O glorious is the exploit doneBy Hanumán the Wind-God's son.The flames o'er Lanká's city rise:The giants' home in ruin lies.O'er roof and wall the fires have spread,Nor harmed a hair of Sítá's head.'
Next: Canto LVI: Mount Arishta.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVI: MOUNT ARISHTA.
He looked upon the burning waste,
Then sought the queen in joyous haste,With words of hope consoled her heart,And made him ready to depart.
p. 425
He sealed Arishta's glorious steepWhose summits beetled o'er the deep.The woods in varied beauty dressedHung like a garland round his crest,And clouds of ever changing hueA robe about his shoulders threw.On him the rays of morning fellTo wake the hill they loved so well,And bid unclose those splendid eyesThat glittered in his mineral dyes.He woke to hear the music madeBy thunders of the white cascade,While every laughing rill that sprangFrom crag to crag its carol sang.For arms, he lifted to the starsHis towering stems of Deodárs,And morning heard his pealing call

In tumbling brook and waterfall.
He trembled when his woods were paleAnd bowed beneath the autumn gale,And when his vocal reeds were stirredHis melancholy moan was heard.  Far down against the mountain's feetThe Vánar heard the wild waves beat;Then turned his glances to the north.Sprang from the peak and bounded forth,The mountain felt the fearful shockAnd trembled through his mass of rock.The tallest trees were crushed and rentAnd headlong to the valley sent,And as the rocking shook each caveLoud was the roar the lions gave.Forth from the shaken cavern cameFierce serpents with their tongues aflame;And every Yaksha, wild with dread,And Kinnar and Gandharva, fled.
Footnotes
424:1 The fire which is supposed to burn beneath the 
sea.
424:2 Sítá is likened to the fire which is an emblem of 

purity.
Next: Canto LVII.: Hanúmán's Return.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LVII.: HANÚMÁN'S RETURN.
Still, like a winged mountain, he
Sprang forward through the airy sea, 1
And rushing through the ether drewThe clouds to follow as he flew,Through the great host around him spread,Grey, golden, dark, and white, and red.
Now in a sable cloud immersed,
Now from its gloomy pall he burst,Like the bright Lord of Stars concealedA moment, and again revealed.Sunábha  
1b passed, he neared the coast
Where waited still the Vánar host.They heard a rushing in the skies,And lifted up their wondering eyes.His wild triumphant shout they knewThat louder still and louder grew,And Jámbaván with eager voiceCalled on the Vánars to rejoice:'Look he returns, the Wind-God's son,And full success his toils have won;Triumphant is the shout that comesLike music of a thousand drums.'

  Up sprang the Vánars from the ground
And listened to the wondrous soundOf hurtling arm and thigh as throughThe region of the air he flew,Loud as the wind, when tempests rave,Roars in the prison of the cave.From crag to crag, from height to height;They bounded in their mad delight,And when he touched the mountain's crest,With reverent welcome round him pressed.They brought him of their woodland fruits,They brought him of the choicest roots,And laughed and shouted in their gleeThe noblest of their chiefs to see.Nor Hanúmán delayed to greetSage Jámbaván with reverence meet;To Angad and the chiefs he bentFor age and rank preëminent,And briefly spoke: 'These eyes have seen,These lips addressed, the Maithil queen.'They sat beneath the waving trees,And Angad spoke in words like these:'O noblest of the Vánar kindFor valour power and might combined,To thee triumphant o'er the foeOur hopes, our lives and all we owe.O faithful heart in perils tried,
p. 426

Which toil nor fear could turn aside,
Thy deed the lady will restore,And Ráma's heart will ache no more,'  
1
Footnotes
425:1 I omit two stanzas which continue the metaphor 
of the sea or lake of air. The moon is its lotus, the sun 
its wild- duck, the clouds are its water-weeds, Mars is its shark and so on. Gorresio remarks: 'This comparison of a great lake to the sky and of celestial to aquatic objects is one of those ideas which the view and qualities of natural scenery awake in lively fancies. Imagine one of those grand and splendid lakes of India covered with lotus blossoms, furrowed by wild-ducks of the most vivid colours, mantled over here and there with flowers and water weeds &c. and it will be understood how the fancy of the poet could readily compare to the sky radiant with celestial azure the blue expanse of the water, to the soft light of the moon the ****** hue of the lotus, to the splendour of the sun the brilliant colours of the wild-fowl, to the stars the flowers, to the cloud the weeds that float upon the water &c.'
425:1b Sunábha is the mountain that rose from the sea 

when Hanúmán passed over to Lanká.
Next: Canto LXI.: The Feast of Honey.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXI.: THE FEAST OF HONEY.
They rose in air: the region grew
Dark with their shadow as they flew.Swift to a lovely grove  
2 they came
That rivalled heavenly Nandan's  3 fame
Where countless bees their honey stored,--The pleasance of the Vánars' lord,To every creature fenced and barred,Which Dadhimukh was set to guard,A noble Vánar, brave and bold,Sugríva's uncle lofty-souled.To Angad came with one accordThe Vánars, and besought their lordThat they those honeyed stores might eatThat made the grove so passing sweet.   He gave consent: they sought the treesThronged with innumerable bees.They rifled all the treasured store,And ate the fruit the branches bore,And still as they prolonged the feastTheir merriment and joy increased.Drunk with the sweets, they danced and bowed,They wildly sang, they laughed aloud.Some climbed and sprang from tree to tree,

Some sat and chattered in their glee.
Some scaled the trees which creepers crowned,And rained the branches to the ground.There with loud laugh a Vánar sprangClose to his friend who madly sang,In doleful mood another creptTo mix his tears with one who wept.   Then Dadhimukh with fury viewedThe intoxicated multitude.He looked upon the rifled shade,And all the ruin they had made;Then called with angry voice, and stroveTo save the remnant of the grove,But warning cries and words were spurned,And angry taunt and threat returned.Then fierce and wild contention rose:With furious words he mingled blows.They by no shame or fear withheld,By drunken mood and ire impelled,Used claws, and teeth, and hands, and beatThe keeper under trampling feet.
Footnotes
426:1 Three Cantos of repetition are omitted.

426:2 Madhuvan the 'honey-wood.'
426:3 Indra's pleasure-ground or elysium.
Next: Canto LXV. : The Tidings.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXV.  1b: THE TIDINGS.
On to Prasravan's hill they sped
Where blooming trees their branches spread.To Raghu's sons their heads they bentAnd did obeisance reverent.Then to their king, by Angad led,Each Vánar chieftain bowed his head;And Hanumán the brave and boldHis tidings to the monarch told;But first in Ráma's hand he placedThe gem that Sítá's brow had graced:'I crossed the sea: I searched a whileFor Sítá in the giants' isle.I found her vext with taunt and threatBy demon guards about her set.Her tresses twined in single braid,On the bare earth her limbs were laid.Sad were her eyes: her cheeks were paleAs shuddering flowers in winter's gale.I stood beside the weeping dame,And gently whispered Ráma's name:With cheering words her grief consoled,And then the whole adventure told.She weeps afar beyond the sea,And her true heart is still with thee.

She gave a sign that thou wouldst know,
She bids thee think upon the crow,And bright mark pressed upon her browWhen none was nigh but she and thou.She bids thee take this precious stone,The sea-born gem thou long hast known.'And I', she said, 'will dull the stingOf woe by gazing on the ring.One little month shall I sustainThis life oppressed with woe and pain:And when the month is ended, IThe giants' prey must surely die.'
p. 427
Footnotes
426:1b Three Cantos consisting of little but repetitions 
are omitted. Dadhimukh escapes from the infuriated 
monkeys and hastens to Sugríva to report their misconduct. Sugríva infers that Hanumán and his band have been successful in their search, and that the exuberance of spirits and the mischief complained of, are but the natural expression of their joy. Dadhimukh obtains little sympathy from Sugríva, and is told to return and send the monkeys on with all possible speed.

Next: Canto LXVI.: Ráma's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVI.: RÁMA'S SPEECH.
There ceased the Vánar: Ráma pressed
The treasured jewel to his breast,And from his eyes the waters brokeAs to the Vánar king he spoke:'As o'er her babe the mother weeps,This flood of tears the jewel steeps.This gem that shone on Sítá's headWas Janak'a gift when we were wed,And the pure brow that wore it lentNew splendour to the ornament.This gem, bright offspring of the wave,The King of Heaven to Janak gave,Whose noble sacrificial riteHad filled the God with new delight.Now, as I gaze upon the prize,Methinks I see my father's eyes.Methinks I see before me standThe ruler of Videha's land. 
1
Methinks mine arms are folded nowRound her who wore it on her brow.Speak, Hanumán, O say, dear friend,What message did my darling send?O speak, and let thy words impartTheir gentle dew to cool my heart.

Ah, 'tis the crown of woe to see
This gem and ask 'Where, where is she?'If for one month her heart be strong,Her days of life will yet be long.But I, with naught to lend relief,This very day must die of grief.Come, Hanumán, and quickly guideThe mourner to his darling's side.O lead me--thou hast learnt the way--I cannot and I will not stay.How can my gentle love endure,So timid, delicate, and pure,The dreadful demons fierce and vileWho watch her in the guarded isle?No more the light of beauty shinesFrom Sítá as she weeps and pines.But pain and sorrow, cloud on cloud.Her moonlight glory dim and shroud.O speak, dear Hanumán, and tellEach word that from her sweet lips fell,Her words, her words alone can giveThe healing balm to make me live.' 
2
Footnotes
427:1 Janak was king of Videha or Mithilá in Behar.

427:2 The original contains two more Cantos which end 
the Book, Canto LXVII begins thus: 'Hanumán thus 
addressed by the great-souled son of Raghu related to the son of Raghu all that Sítá had said.' And the two Cantos contain nothing but Hanumán's account of his interview with Sítá, and the report of his own speeches as well as of hers.
Next: Book VI

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
BOOK VI. 1b
Next: Canto I.: Ráma's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO I.: RÁMA'S SPEECH.
The son of Raghu heard, consoled,
The wondrous tale Hanumán told;And, as his joyous hope grew high,In friendly words he made reply:
'Behold a mighty task achieved.
Which never heart but his conceived.Who else across the sea can spring,Save Váyu 
2b and the Feathered King? 3b
Who, pass the portals strong and high.Which Nágas, 
4b Gods, and fiends defy,
Where Rávan's hosts their station keep,--And come uninjured o'er the deep?By such a deed the Wind-God's sonGood service to the king has done,And saved from ruin and disgraceLakshman and me and Raghu's race.Well has he planned and bravely fought.And with due care my lady sought.But of the sea I sadly think,And the sweet hopes that cheered me sink.How can we cross the leagues of foamThat keep us from the giant's home?

What can the Vánar legions more
Than muster on the ocean shore?'
Next: Canto II.: Sugríva's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO II.: SUGRÍVA'S SPEECH.
He ceased: and King Sugríva tried
To calm his grief, and thus replied:'Be to thy nobler nature true,Nor let despair thy soul subdue.This cloud of causeless woe dispel,For all as yet has prospered well,And we have traced thy queen, and knowThe dwelling of our Rákshas foe.Arise, consult: thy task must beTo cast a bridge athwart the sea,The city of our foe to reachThat crowns the mountain by the beach;
p. 428
And when our feet that isle shall tread,Rejoice and deem thy foeman dead.The sea unbridged, his walls defyBoth fiends and children of the sky,Though at the fierce battalions' headLord Indra's self the onset led.Yea, victory is thine beforeThe long bridge touch the farther shore,So fleet and fierce and strong are these

Who limb them as their fancies please.
Away with grief and sad surmiseThat mar the noblest enterprise,And with their weak suspicion blightThe sage's plan, the hero's might.Come, this degenerate weakness spurn,And bid thy dauntless heart return,For each fair hope by grief is crossedWhen those we love are dead or lost.Arise, O best of those who know,Arm for the giant's overthrow.None in the triple world I seeWho in the fight may equal thee;None who before thy face may standAnd brave the bow that arms thy hand,Trust to these mighty Vánars: theyWith full success thy trust will pay,When thou shalt reach the robber's hold,And loving arms round Sítá fold.'
Footnotes
427:1b The Sixth Book is called in Sanskrit Yuddha-
Kánda or The War, and Lanká-Kánda. It is generally 
known at the present day by the latter title.

427:2b Váyu is the God of Wind.
427:3b Garuda the King of Birds.
427:4b Serpent-Gods.
Next: Canto III.: Lanká.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO III.: LANKÁ.
He ceased: and Raghu's son gave heed,
Attentive to his prudent rede:Then turned again, with hope inspired,To Hanumán, and thus inquired:
'Light were the task for thee, I ween,
To bridge the sea that gleams betweenThe mainland and the island shore.Or dry the deep and guide as o'er.Fain would I learn from thee whose feetHave trod the stones of every street,Of fenced Lanká's towers and forts,And walls and moats and guarded ports,And castles where the giants dwell,And battlemented citadel.O Váyu's son, describe it all,With palace, fort, and gate, and wall.'
He ceased: and, skilled in arts that guide
The eloquent, the chief replied:
'Vast is the city, gay and strong,
Where elephants unnumbered throng,

And countless hosts of Rákshas breed
Stand ready by the car and steed,Four massive gates, securely barred,All entrance to the city guard,With murderous engines fixt to throwBolt, arrow, rock to check the foe,
And many a mace with iron head
That strikes at once a hundred dead.Her golden ramparts wide and highWith massy strength the foe defy,Where inner walls their rich inlayOf coral, turkis, pearl display.Her circling moats are broad and deep,Where ravening monsters dart and leap.By four great piers each moat is spannedWhere lines of deadly engines stand.In sleepless watch at every gateUnnumbered hosts of giants wait,And masters of each weapon, rearThe threatening pike and sword and spear.My fury hurled those ramparts down,Filled up the moats that gird the town,The piers and portals overturned,And stately Lanká spoiled and burned,Howe'er we Vánars force our wayO'er the wide seat of Varun's 
1 sway,
Be sure that city of the foeIs doomed to sudden overthrow,

Nay, why so vast an army lead?
Brave Angad, Dwivid good at need,Fierce Mainda, Panas famed in fight,And Níla's skill and Nala's might,And Jámbaván the strong and wise,Will dare the easy enterprise.Assailed by these shall Lanká fallWith gate and rampart, tower and wall.Command the gathering, chief: and theyIn happy hour will haste away.'
Next: Canto IV.: The March.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IV.: THE MARCH.
He ceased; and spurred by warlike pride
The impetuous son of Raghu cried:'Soon shall mine arm with wrathful joyThat city of the foe destroy.Now, chieftain, now collect the host,And onward to the southern coast!The sun in his meridian towerGives glory to the Vánar power.The demon lord who stole my queenBy timely flight his life may screen.She, when she knows her lord is near,Will cling to hope and banish fear,Saved like a dying wretch who sipsThe drink of Gods with fevered lips.Arise, thy troops to battle lead:All happy omens counsel speed.The Lord of Stars in favouring skiesBodes glory to our enterprise.This arm shall slay the fiend; and she.My consort, shall again be free.
p. 429
Mine upward-throbbing eye foreshows

The longed-for triumph o'er my foes.
Far in the van be Níla's post,To scan the pathway for the host,And let thy bravest and thy best,A hundred thousand, wait his hest.Go forth, O warrior Níla, leadThe legions on through wood and meadWhere pleasant waters cool the ground,And honey, flowers, and fruit abound,Go, and with timely care preventThe Rákshas foeman's dark intent.With watchful troops each valley guardEre brooks and fruits and roots be marredAnd search each glen and leafy shadeFor hostile troops in ambuscade.But let the weaklings stay behind:For heroes is our task designed.Let thousands of the Vánar breedThe vanguard of the armies lead:Fierce and terrific must it beAs billows of the stormy sea.There be the hill-huge Gaja's place,And Gavaya's, strongest of his race,And, like the bull that leads the herd,Gaváksha's, by no fears deterredLet Rishabh, matchless in the mightOf warlike arms, protect our right,And Gandhamádan next in rankDefend and guide the other flank.

I, like the God who rules the sky
Borne on Airávat 1 mounted high
On stout Hanúmán's back will ride,The central host to cheer and guide.Fierce as the God who rules below,On Angad's back let Lakshman showLike him who wealth to mortals shares, 
2
The lord whom Sárvabhauma 3 bears.
The bold Sushen's impetuous might,And Vegadars'í's piercing sight,And Jámbaván whom bears revere,Illustrious three, shall guard the rear.'
He ceased, the royal Vánar heard,
And swift, obedient to his word,Sprang forth in numbers none might tellFrom mountain, care, and bosky dell,From rocky ledge and breezy height,Fierce Vánars burning for the fight.And Ráma's course was southward bentAmid the mighty armament.On, joyous, pressed in close arrayThe hosts who owned Sugríva's sway,With nimble feet, with rapid boundExploring, ere they passed, the ground,While from ten myriad throats rang outThe challenge and the battle shout.
On roots and honeycomb they fed,

And clusters from the boughs o'erhead,
Or from the ground the tall trees toreRich with the flowery load they bore.Some carried comrades, wild with mirth,Then cast their riders to the earth,Who swiftly to their feet aroseAnd overthrew their laughing foes.While still rang out the general cry,'King Rávan and his fiends shall die,'Still on, exulting in the prideOf conscious strength, the Vánars hied,And gazed where noble Sahya, bestof mountains, raised each towering crest.They looked on lake and streamlet, whereThe lotus bloom was bright and fair,Nor marched--for Ráma's hest they fearedWhere town or haunt of men appeared.Still onward, fearful as the wavesOf Ocean when he roars and raves,Led by their eager chieftains, wentThe Vánars' countless armament.Each captain, like a noble steedUrged by the lash to double speed.Pressed onward, filled with zeal and pride,By Ráma's and his brother's side,Who high above the Vánar throngOn mighty backs were borne along,Like the great Lords of Day and NightSeized by eclipsing planets might.

Then Lakshman radiant as the morn,
On Angad's shoulders high upborne.With sweet consoling words that wokeNew ardour, to his brother spoke:'Soon shalt thou turn, thy queen regainedAnd impious Rávan's life-blood drained,In happiness and high renownTo dear Ayodhyá's happy town.I see around exceeding fairAll omens of the earth and air.Auspicious breezes sweet and lowTo greet the Vánar army blow,And softly to my listening earCome the glad cries of bird and deer.Bright is the sky around us, brightWithout a cloud the Lord of Light,And S'ukra 
1b with propitious love
Looks on thee from his throne above.The pole-star and the Sainted Seven 
2b
Shine brightly in the northern heaven,And great Tris'anku, 
3b glorious king,
p. 430
Ikshváku's son from whom we spring,Beams in unclouded glory nearHis holy priest 
1 whom all revere.
Undimmed the two Vis'ákhás 2 shine,
The strength and glory of our line,

And Nairrit's 3 influence that aids
Our Rákshas foemen faints and fades.
The running brooks are fresh and fair,The boughs their ripening clusters bear,And scented breezes gently swayThe leaflet of the tender spray.See, with a glory half divineThe Vánars' ordered legions shine,Bright as the Gods' exultant trainWho saw the demon Tárak slain.O let thine eyes these signs behold,And bid thy heart be glad and bold.'
The Vánar squadrons densely spread
O'er all the country onward sped,While rising from the rapid beatOf bears' and monkeys' hastening feetDust hid the earth with thickest veil,And made the struggling sunbeams pale.Now where Mahendra's peaks ariseCame Ráma of the lotus eyesAnd the long arm's resistless might,And clomb the mountain's wood-crowned height.Thence Das'aratha's son beheldWhere billowy Ocean rose and swelled.Past Malaya's peaks and Sahya's chainThe Vánar legions reached the main,And stood in many a marshalled bandOn loud-resounding Ocean's strand.

To the fair wood that fringed the tide
Came Das'aratha's son, and cried:'At length, my lord Sugríva, weHave reached King Várun's realm the sea,And one great thought, still-vexing, howTo cross the flood, awaits us now.The broad deep ocean, that deniesA passage, stretched before us lies.Then let us halt and plan the whileHow best to storm the giant's isle.'
He ceased: Sugríva on the coast
By trees o'ershadowed stayed the host,That seemed in glittering lines to beThe bright waves of a second sea.Then from the shore the captains gazedOn billows which the breezes raised
To fury, as they dashed in foam
O'er Várun's realm, the Asurs' home: 
1b
The sea that laughed with foam, and dancedWith waves whereon the sunbeams glanced:Where, when the light began to fade,Huge crocodiles and monsters played;And, when the moon went up the sky,The troubled billows rose on highFrom the wild watery world whereonA thousand moons reflected shone:Where awful serpents swam and showed

Their fiery crests which flashed and glowed,
Illumining the depths of hell,The prison where the demons dwell.The eye, bewildered, sought in vainThe bounding line of sky and main:Alike in shade, alike in glowWere sky above and sea below.There wave-like clouds by clouds were chased,Here cloud-like billows roared and raced:Then shone the stars, and many a gemThat lit the waters answered them.They saw the great-souled Ocean stirredTo frenzy by the winds, and heard,Loud as ten thousand drums, the roarOf wild waves dashing on the shore.They saw him mounting to defyWith deafening voice the troubled sky.And the deep bed beneath him swellIn fury as the billows fell.
Footnotes
428:1 The God of the sea.
429:1 Indra's elephant.

429:2 Kuvera, God of wealth.
429:3 Kuvera's elephant.
429:1b The planet Venus, or its regent who is regarded 
as the son of Bhrigu and preceptor of the Daitvas.
429:2b The seven rishis or saints who form the constellation of the Great Bear.
429:3b Tris'anku was raised to the skies to form a constellation in the southern hemisphere. The story in 
told in Book I. Canto LX.
430:1 The sage Vis'vámitra, who performed for 
Tris'anku the great sacrifice which raised him to the 
heavens.
430:2 One of the lunar asterisms containing four or 
originally two stars under the regency of a dual divinity 
Indrágni, Indra and Agni.
430:3 The lunar asterism Múla, belonging to the 
Rákshases.
Next: Canto V.: Ráma's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO V.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.
There on the coast in long array
The Vánars' marshalled legions lay,Where Níla's care had ordered wellThe watch of guard and sentinel,And Mainda moved from post to postWith Dwivid to protect the host.
Then Ráma stood by Lakshman's side.
And mastered by his sorrow cried:'My brother dear, the heart's distress,As days wear on, grows less and less.But my deep-seated grief, alas,Grows fiercer as the seasons pass.Though for my queen my spirit longs,And broods indignant o'er my wrongs,Still wilder is my grief to knowThat her young life is passed in woe.Breathe, gentle gale, O breathe where sheLies prisoned, and then breathe on me,
p. 431
And, though my love I may not meet,

Thy kiss shall be divinely sweet.
Ah, by the giant's shape appalled,On her dear lord for help she called,Still in mine ears the sad cry ringsAnd tears my heart with poison stings.Through the long daylight and the gloomOf night wild thoughts of her consumeMy spirit, and my love suppliesThe torturing flame which never dies.Leave me, my brother; I will sleepCouched on the bosom of the deep.For the cold wave may bring me peaceAnd bid the fire of passion cease.One only thought my stay must be,That earth, one earth, holds her and me,To hear, to know my darling livesSome life-supporting comfort gives,As streams from distant fountains runO'er meadows parching in the sun.Ah when, my foeman at my feet,Shall I my queen, my glory, meet,The blossom of her dear face raiseAnd on her eyes enraptured gaze,Press her soft lips to mine again,And drink a balm to banish pain!Alas, alas! where lies she now,My darling of the lovely brow?On the cold earth, no help at hand,Forlorn amid the Rákshas band,

King Janak's child still calls on me,
Her lord and love, to set her free.But soon in glory will she riseA crescent moon in autumn skies,And those dark rovers of the night.Like scattered clouds shall turn in flight.'
Footnotes
430:1b The Asurs or demons dwell imprisoned in the 
depths beneath the sea.
Next: Canto VI.: Rávan's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VI.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.
But when the giant king surveyed
His glorious town in ruin laid,And each dire sign of victory wonBy Hanumán the Wind-God's son,He vailed his angry eyes oppressedBy shame, and thus his lords addressed:'The Vánar spy has passed the gateOf Lanká long inviolate,Eluded watch and ward, and seenWith his bold eyes the captive queen.My royal roof with flames is red,The bravest of my lords are dead,And the fierce Vánar in his hateHas left our city desolate.Now ponder well the work that liesBefore us, ponder and advise.With deep-observing judgment scanThe peril, and mature a plan.From counsel, sages say, the root,Springs victory, most glorious fruit.First ranks the king, when woe impendsWho seeks the counsel of his friends,Of kinsmen ever faithful found,Or those whose hopes with his are bound,

Then with their aid his strength applies,
And triumphs in his enterprise.Next ranks the prince who plans alone,No counsel seeks to aid his own,Weighs loss and gain and wrong and right,And seeks success with earnest might.Unwisest he who spurns delays,Who counts no cost, no peril weighs,Speeds to his aim, defying fate,And risks his all, precipitate.Thus too in counsel sages findA best, a worst, a middle kind.When gathered counsellors exploreThe way by light of holy lore,And all from first to last agree,Is the best counsel of the three.Next, if debate first waxes high,And each his chosen plan would tryTill all agree at last, we deemThis counsel second in esteem.Worst of the three is this, when eachAssails with taunt his fellow's speech;When all debate, and no consentConcludes the angry argument.Consult then, lords; my task shall beTo crown with act your wise decree.With thousands of his wild alliesThe vengeful Ráma hither hies;With unresisted might and speed

Across the flood his troops will lead,
Or for the Vánar host will drainThe channels of the conquered main.'
Next: Canto VII.: Rávan Encouraged.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VII.: RÁVAN ENCOURAGED.
He ceased: they scorned, with blinded eyes,
The foeman and his bold allies,Raised reverent bands with one accord,And thus made answer to their lord:'Why yield thee, King, to causeless fear?A mighty host with sword and spearAnd mace and axe and pike and lanceWaits but thy signal to advance.Art thou not he who slew of oldThe Serpent-Gods, and stormed their hold;Scaled Mount Kailása and o'erthrewKuvera  
1 and his Yaksha crew,
p. 432
Compelling S'iva's haughty friendBeneath a mightier arm to bend?Didst thou not bring from realms afarThe marvel of the magic car,When they who served Kuvera fellCrushed in their mountain citadel?Attracted by thy matchless fameTo thee, a suppliant, Maya came,The lord of every Dánav band,

And won thee with his daughter's hand.
Thy arm in hell itself was felt,Where Vásuki 
1 and S'ankha dwelt,
And they and Takshak, overthrown,Were forced thy conquering might to own.The Gods in vain their blessing gaveTo heroes bravest of the brave,Who strove a year and, sorely pressed,Their victor's peerless might confessed.In vain their magic arts they tried,In vain thy matchless arm defied.King Varun's sons with fourfold force,Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse,But for a while thy power withstood,And, conquered, mourned their hardihood.Thou hast encountered, face to face,King Yama 
2 with his murdering mace.
Fierce as the wild tempestuous aea,What terror had his wrath for thee,Though death in every threatening form,And woe and torment, urged the storm?Thine arm a glorious victory wonO'er the dread king who pities none;And the three worlds, from terror freed,In joyful wonder praised thy deed.The tribe of Warriors, strong and dreadAs Indra's self, o'er earth had spread;As giant trees that towering standln mountain glens, they filled the land.

Can Raghu's son encounter foes
Fierce, numerous, and strong as those?Yet, trained in war and practised well,O'ermatched by thee, they fought and fell,Stay in thy royal home, nor careThe battle and the toil to share;But let the easy fight be wonBy Indrajit 
3 thy matchless son.
All, all shall die, if thou permit,Slain by the hand of Indrajit.'
Footnotes
431:1 The God of Riches, brother and enemy of Rávan 
and first possessor of Pushpak the flying car.
432:1 King of the Serpents. S'ankha and Takshak are two of the eight Serpent Chiefs.
432:2 The God of Death, the Pluto of the Hindus.
432:3 Literally Indra's conqueror, so called from his victory over that God.

Next: Canto VIII.: Prahasta's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO VIII.: PRAHASTA'S SPEECH.
Dark as a cloud of autumn, dread
Prahasta joined his palms and said:
'Gandharvas, Gods, the hosts who dwell
In heaven, in air, in earth, in hell,Have yielded to thy might, and howShall two weak men oppose thee now?Hanúmán came, a foe disguised,And mocked us heedless and surprised,Or never had he lived to fleeAnd boast that he has fought with me.Command, O King, and this right handShall sweep the Vánars from the land,And hill and dale, to Ocean's shore,Shall know the death-doomed race no more.But let my care the means deviseTo guard thy city from surprise.'
Then Durmukh cried, of Rákshas race:
'Too long we brook the dire disgrace.He gave our city to the flames,He trod the chambers of thy dames.Ne'er shall so weak and vile a thing

Unpunished brave the giants' king.
Now shall this single arm attackAnd drive the daring Vánars back,Till to the winds of heaven they flee,Or seek the depths of earth and sea.'
Then, brandishing the mace he bore,
Whose horrid spikes were stained with gore,While fury made his eyeballs red,Impetuous Vajradanshtra said:
'Why waste a thought on one so vile
As Hanúmán the Vánar, whileSugriva, Lakshman, yet remain,And Ráma mightier still, unslain?This mace to-day shall crush the three,And all the host will turn and flee.Listen, and I will speak: incline,O King, to hear these words of mine,For the deep plan that I proposeWill swiftly rid thee of thy foes.Let thousands of thy host assumeThe forms of men in youthful bloom,In war's magnificent arrayDraw near to Raghu's son, and say:'Thy younger brother Bharat sendsThis army, and thy cause befriends.'Then let our legions hasten nearWith bow and mace and sword and spear,

And on the Vánar army rain
Our steel and stone till all be slain.If Raghu's sons will fain believe,Entangled in the net we weave,The penalty they both must pay,And lose their forfeit lives to-day.'
p. 433
Then with his warrior soul on fire,Nikumbha spoke in burning ire:   'I, only I, will take the field,And Ragha's son his life shall yield.Within these walls, O Chiefs, abide,Nor part ye from our monarch's side.'
Next: Canto IX.: Vibhíshan's Counsel.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO IX.: VIBHÍSHAN'S COUNSEL.
A score of warriors  1 forward sprang,
And loud the clashing iron rang
Of mace and axe and spear and sword,As thus they spake unto their lord:'Their king Sugríva will we slay,And Raghu's sons, ere close of day,And strike the wretch Hanúmán down,The spoiler of our golden town.'   But sage Vibhíshan strove to calmThe chieftains' fury; palm to palmHe joined in lowly reverence, pressedBefore them, and the throng addressed: 
2
   'Dismiss the hope of conquering oneSo stern and strong as Raghu's son.In due control each sense he keepsWith constant care that never sleeps.Whose daring heart has e'er conceivedThe exploit Hanumán achieved,Across the fearful sea to spring,The tributary rivers' king?O Rákshas lords, in time be wise,Nor Ráma's matchless power despise.And say, what evil had the son

Of Raghu to our monarch done,
Who stole the dame he loved so wellAnd keeps her in his citadel;If Kharu in his foolish prideEncountered Ráma, fought, and died,May not the meanest love his lifeAnd guard it in the deadly strife?
The Maithil dame, O Rákshas King,
Sore peril to thy realm will bring.Restore her while there yet is time,Nor let us perish for thy crime.O, let the Maithil lady goEre the avenger bend his bowTo ruin with his arrowy showersOur Lanká with her gates and towers.Let Janak's child again be freeEre the wild Vánars cross the sea,In their resistless might assailOur city and her ramparts scale.Ah, I conjure thee by the ties0f brotherhood, be just and wise.In all my thoughts thy good I seek,And thus my prudent counsel speak.Let captive Sitá be restoredEre, fierce as autumn's sun, her lordSend his keen arrows from the stringTo drink the life-blood of our king.This fury from thy soul dismiss,

The bane of duty, peace, and bliss.
Seek duty's path and walk therein,And joy and endless glory win.Restore the captive, ere we feelThe piercing point of Ráma's steel.O spare thy city, spare the livesOf us, our friends, our sons and wives.'   Thus spake Vibhíshan wise and brave:The Rákshas king no answer gave,But bade his lords the council close,And sought his chamber for repose.
Footnotes
433:1 Their names are Nikumbha, Rabhasa, Súryas'atru, 
Suptaghna, Yajnakopa, Mahápárava, Mahodara, 
Agniketu, Ras'miketu, Durdharsha, Indrasatru, Prahasta, Virupáksha, Vajradanshtra, Dhúmráksha, Durmukha, Mahábala.
433:2 Similarly Antenor urges the restoration of Helen: 
   'Let Sparta's treasures be this hour restored,   And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.   As this advice ye practise or reject,

   So hope success, or dread the dire effect,'
   POPE'S Homer's Iliad, Book VII.
Next: Canto X.: Vibhíshan's Counsel.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO X.: VIBHÍSHAN'S COUNSEL.
Soon as the light of morning broke,
Vibhíshan from his slumber woke,And, duty guiding every thought,The palace of his brother sought.Vast as a towering hill that showsHis peaks afar, that palace rose.Here stood within the monarch's gateSage nobles skilful in debate.There strayed in glittering raiment throughThe courts his royal retinue,Where in wild measure rose and fellThe music of the drum and shell,And talk grew loud, and many a dameOf fairest feature went and cameThrough doors a marvel to behold,With pearl inlaid on burning gold:Therein Gandharvas or the fleetLords of the storm might joy to meet.He passed within the wondrous pile,Chief glory of the giants' isle:Thus, ere his fiery course be done,An autumn cloud admits the sun.
p. 434

He heard auspicious voices raise
With loud accord the note of praise,And sages, deep in Scripture, singEach glorious triumph of the king.He saw the priests in order stand,Curd, oil, in every sacred hand;And by them flowers were laid and grain,Due offerings to the holy train.Vibhíshan to the monarch bowed,Raised on a throne above the crowd:Then, skilled in arts of soft address,He raised his voice the king to bless,And sate him on a seat where heFull in his brother's sight should be.The chieftain there, while none could hear,Spoke his true speech for Rávan's ear,And to his words of wisdom lentThe force of weightiest argument:  'O brother, hear! since Ráma's queenA captive in thy house has been,Disastrous omens day by dayHave struck our souls with wild dismay.No longer still and strong and clearThe flames of sacrifice appear,But, restless with the frequent spark,Neath clouds of smoke grow faint and dark.Our ministering priests turn paleTo see their wonted offerings fail,

And ants and serpents creep and crawl
Within the consecrated hall. 1
Dried are the udders of our cows,Our elephants have juiceless brows, 
2
Nor can the sweetest pasture stayThe charger's long unquiet neigh.Big tears from mules and camels flowWhose staring coats their trouble show,Nor can the leech's art restoreTheir health and vigour as before.Rapacious birds are fierce and bold:Not single hunters as of old,In banded troops they chase the prey,Or gathering on our temples stay.Through twilight hours with shriek and howlAround the city jackals prowl,And wolves and foul hyaenas waitAthirst for blood at every gate.One sole atonement still may cureThese evils, and our weal assure.Restore the Maithil dame, and winAn easy pardon for thy sin.'
The Rákshas monarch heard, and moved
To sudden wrath his speech reproved:   'No danger, brother, can I see:The Maithil dame I will not free.Though all the Gods for Ráma fight,He yields to my superior might.'

Thus the tremendous king who broke
The ranks of heavenly warriors spoke,And, sternly purposed to resist,His brother from the hall dismissed.
Footnotes
434:1 The Agnisálá or room where the sacrificial fire 
was kept.
434:2 The exudation of a fragrant fluid from the male elephant's temples, especially at certain seasons, is 
frequently spoken of in Sanskrit poetry. It is said to deceive and attract the bees, and is regarded as a sign of health and masculine vigour.
Next: Canto XI.: The Summons.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XI.: THE SUMMONS.
Still Rávan's haughty heart rebelled.
The counsel of the wise repelled,And, as his breast with passion burned,His thoughts again to Sitá turned.Thus, to each sign of danger blind,To love and war he still inclined.Then mounted he his car that glowedWith gems and golden net, and rodeWhere, gathered at the monarch's call,The nobles filled the council hall.A host of warriors bright and gayWith coloured robes and rich array,With shield and mace and spear and sword,Followed the chariot of their lordMid the loud voice of shells and beatOf drums he raced along the street,And, ere he came, was heard afarThe rolling thunder of his car.He reached the doors: the nobles bentTheir heads before him reverent:And, welcomed with their loud acclaim,Within the glorious hall he came.He sat upon a royal seatWith golden steps beneath his feet,

And bade the heralds summon all
His captains to the council hall.The heralds heard the words he spake,And sped from house to house to wakeThe giants where they slept or spentThe careless hours in merriment.These heard the summons and obeyed:From chamber, grove, and colonnade,On elephants or cars they rode,Or through the streets impatient strode.As birds on rustling pinions flyThrough regions of the darkened sky,Thus cars and mettled coursers throughThe crowded streets of Lanká flew.The council hall was reached, and then,As lions seek their mountain den.Through massy doors that opened wide,With martial stalk the captains hied.Welcomed with honour as was meetThey stooped to press their monarch's feet,
p. 435
And each a place in order foundOn stool, on cushion, or the ground.Nor did the sage Vibhishan longDelay to join the noble throng.High on a car that shone like flameWith gold and flashing gems he came,

Drew near and spoke his name aloud,
And reverent to his brother bowed.
Next: Canto XII.: Ravan's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XII.: RAVAN'S SPEECH.
The king in counsel unsurpassed
His eye around the synod cast,And fierce Prahasta, first and bestOf all his captains, thus addressed:   'Brave master of each warlike art,Arouse thee and perform thy part.Array thy fourfold forces  
1 well
To guard our isle and citadel.'   The captain of the hosts obeyed,The troops with prudent skill arrayed;Then to the hall again he hied,And stood before the king and cried:   'Each inlet to the town is closedWithout, within, are troops disposed.With fearless heart thine aim pursueAnd do the deed thou hast in view,'   Thus spoke Prahasta in the zealThat moved him for the kingdom's weal.And thus the monarch, who pursuedHis own delight, his speech renewed:'In ease and bliss, in toil and pain,In doubts of duty, pleasure, pain,Your proper path I need not tell.For of yourselves ye know it well.

The Storm-Gods, Moon, and planets bring
New glory to their heavenly king, 2
And, ranged about your monarch, yeGive joy and endless fame to me.My secret counsel have I kept,While senseless Kumbhakarna slept.Six months the warrior's slumbers lastAnd bind his torpid senses fast;Bat now his deep repose he breaks,The beat of all our champions wakes.I captured, Ráma's heart to wring,This daughter of Videha's king.And brought her from that distant land  
3
Where wandered many a Rákshas band.
Disdainful still my love she spurns.
Still from each prayer and offering turns,Yet in all lands beneath the sunNo dame may rival Sítá, none,Her dainty waist is round and slight,Her cheek like autumn's moon is bright.And she like fruit in graven goldMocks her  
1b whom Maya framed of old.
Faultless in form, how firmly treadHer feet whose soles are rosy red!Ah, as I gaze her beauty takesMy spirit, and my passion wakes.Looking for Ráma far awayShe sought with tears a year's delay

Nor gazing on her love-lit eye
Could I that earnest prayer deny.But baffled hopes and vain desireAt length my patient spirit tire.How shall the sons of Raghu sweepTo vengeance o'er the pathless deep?How shall they lead the Vánar trainAcross the monster-teeming main?One Vánar yet could find a wayTo Lanká's town, and burn and slay.Take counsel then, remembering stillThat we from men need fear no ill;And give your sentence in debate,For matchless is the power of fate.Assailed by you the Gods who dwellIn heaven beneath our fury fell.And shall we fear these creatures bredIn forests, by Sugríva led?E'en now on ocean's farther strand,The sons of Das'aratha stand.And follow, burning to attackTheir giant foes, on Sítá's track.Consult then, lords for ye are wise:A seasonable plan devise.The captive lady to retain,And triumph when the foes are slain.No power can bring across the foamThose Vánars to our island home;Or if they madly will defy

Our conquering might, they needs must die.'
   Then Kumbhakarna's anger woke.And wroth at Rávan's words he spoke:'O Monarch, when thy ravished eyesFirst looked upon thy lovely prize,Then was the time to bid us scanEach peril and mature a plan.Blest is the king who acts with heed,And ne'er repents one hasty deed;And hapless he whose troubled soulMourns over days beyond control.
p. 436
Thou hast, in beauty's toils ensnared,A desperate deed of boldness dared;By fortune saved ere Ráma's steelOne wound, thy mortal bane, could deal.But, Rávan, as the deed is done,The toil of war I will not shun.This arm, O rover of the night,Thy foemen to the earth shall smite,Though Indra with the Lord of Flame,The Sun and Storms, against me came.E'en Indra, monarch of the skies,Would dread my club and mountain size,Shrink from these teeth and quake to hearThe thunders of my voice of fear.No second dart shall Ráma cast:

The first he aims shall be the last.
He falls, and these dry lips shall drainThe blood of him my hand has slain;And Sitá, when her champion dies,Shall be thine undisputed prize.'
Footnotes
435:1 Consisting of warriors on elephants, warriors in 
chariots, charioteers, and infantry.
435:2 Indra, generally represented as surrounded by the Maruts or Storm-Gods.
435:3 Janasthán, where Ráma a lived as an ascetic.
435:1b Máyá, regarded as the paragon of female beauty, was the creation of Maya the chief artificer of the 
Datyas or Dinavs.
Next: Canto XIII.: Rávan's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIII.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.
But Mahápárs'va saw the sting
Of keen reproach had galled the king;And humbly, eager to appeaseHis anger, spoke in words like these:   'And breathes there one so cold and weakThe forest and the gloom to seekWhere savage beasts abound, and spareTo taste the luscious honey there?Art thou not lord? and who is heShall venture to give laws to thee?Love thy Videhan still, and treadUpon thy prostrate foeman's head.O'er Sitá's will let thine prevail,And strength achieve if flattery fail.What though the lady yet be coyAnd turn her from the proffered joy?Soon shall her conquered heart relentAnd yield to love and blandishment.With us let Kumbhakarna fight,And Indrajit of matchless mightWe need not other champions, theyShall lead us forth to rout and slay.Not ours to bribe or soothe or partThe foeman's force with gentle art,

Doomed, conquered by our might, to feel
The vengeance of the warrior's steel.'   The Rákshas monarch heard, and movedBy flattering hopes the speech approved:   'Hear me,' he cried, 'great chieftain, tellWhat in the olden time befell,--A secret tale which, long supressed,Lies prisoned only in my breast.One day--a day I never forget--Fair Punjikasthalá  
1 I met,
When, radiant as a flame of fire,She sought the palace of the Sire.In passion's eager grasp I toreFrom her sweet limbs the robes she wore,And heedless of her prayers and criesStrained to my breast the vanquised prize.Like Nalini  
2 with soil distained.
The mansion of the Sire she gained,And weeping made the outrage knownTo Brahmá on his heavenly throne.He in his wrath pronounced a curse,--That lord who made the universe:'If, Rávan, thou a second timeBe guilty of so foul a crime,Thy head in shivers shall be rent:Be warned, and dread the punishment.Awed by the threat of vengeance stillI force not Sitá's stubborn will.Terrific as the sea in might:

My steps are like the Storm-Gods' flight;
But Ráma knows not this, or heHad never sought to war with me.Where is the man would idly braveThe lion in his mountain cave,And wake him when with slumbering eyesGrim, terrible as Death, he lies?No, blinded Ráma knows me not:Ne'er has he seen mine arrows shot;Ne'er marked them speeding to their aimLike snakes with cloven tongues of flame.On him those arrows will I turn,Whose fiery points shall rend and burn.Quenched by my power when I assailThe glory of his might shall fail,As stars before the sun grow dimAnd yield their feeble light to him.'
Next: Canto XIV.: Vibhíshan's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIV.: VIBHÍSHAN'S SPEECH.
He ceased: Vibhíshan ill at ease
Addressed the king in words like these:   O Rávan, O my lord, bewareOf Sitá dangerous as fair,Nor on thy heedless bosom hangThis serpent with a deadly fang.O King, the Maithil dame restoreTo Raghu's matchlees son beforeThose warriors of the woodlands, vastAs mountain peaks, approaching fast,Armed with fierce teeth and claws, encloseThy city with unsparing foes.O, be the Maithil dame restoredEre loosened from the clanging cord
p. 437
The vengeful shafts of Ráma fly,And low in death thy princes lie.In all thy legions hast thou oneA match in war for Raghu's son?Can Kumbhakarna's self withstand,Or Indrajit, that mighty hand?In vain with Ráma wilt thou strive:

Thou wilt not save thy soul alive
Though guarded by the Lord of DayAnd Storm-Gods' terrible array,In vain to Indra wilt thou fly,Or seek protection in the sky,In Yama's gloomy mansion dwell,Or hide thee in the depths of hell.'   He ceased; and when his lips were closedPrahasta thus his rede opposed:   'O timid heart, to counsel thus!What terrors have the Gods for us?Can snake, Gandharva, fiend appalThe giants' sons who scorn them all?And shall we now our birth disgrace,And dread a king of human race?'Thus fierce Prahasta counselled ill;But sage Vibhíshan's constant willThe safety of the realm ensued;Who thus in turn his speech renewed:   'Yes, when a soul defiled with sinShall mount to heaven and enter in,Then, chieftain, will experience teachThe truth of thy disdainful speech.Can I, or thou, or these or allOur bravest compass Ráma's fall,The chief in whom all virtues shine,The pride of old Ikshváku'a line,With whom the Gods may scarce compareIn skill to act, in heart to dare?

Yea, idly mayst thou vaunt thee, till
Sharp arrows winged with matchless skillFrom Ráma's bowstring, fleet and fierceAs lightning's flame, thy body pierce.Nikumbha shall not save thee then,Nor Rávan, from the lord of men.O Monarch, hear my last appeal,My counsel for thy kingdom's weal,This sentence I again declare:O giant King, beware, beware!Save from the ruin that impendsThy town, thy people, and thy friends;O hear the warning urged once more:To Raghu's son the dame restore.'
Footnotes
436:1 One of the Nymphs of Indra's heaven.
436:2 The Lotus River, a branch of the heavenly Gangá.
Next: Canto XV.: Indrajit's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XV.: INDRAJIT'S SPEECH.
He ceased: and Indrajit the pride
Of Rákshas warriors thus replied:   'Is this a speech our king should hear,This counsel of ignoble fear?A scion of our glorious raceShould ne'er conceive a thought so base,But one mid all our kin we find.Vibhíshan, whose degenerate mindNo spark of gallant pride retains.Whose coward soul his lineage stains.Against one giant what can twoUnhappy sons of Raghu do?Away with idle fears, away!Matched with our meanest, what are they?Beneath my conquering prowess fellThe Lord of earth and heaven and hell,  
1
Through every startled region dreadOf my resistless fury spread;And Gods in each remotest sphereConfessed the universal fear.Rending the air with roar and groan,Airávt  
2 to the earth was thrown.
From his huge head the tusks I drew,

And smote the Gods with fear anew.
Shall I who tame celestials' pride,By whom the fiends are terrified,Now prove a weakling little worth,And fail to slay those sons of earth?'   He ceased: Vibhíshan trained and triedIn war and counsel thus replied   'Thy speech is marked with scorn of truth,With rashness and the pride of youth.Yea, to thy ruin like a childThou pratest, and thy words are wild.Most dear, O Indrajit, to theeShould Rávan's weal and safety be,For thou art called his son, but thouArt proved his direst foeman now,When warned by me thou hast not triedTo turn the coming woe aside.Both thee and him 'twere meet to slay,Who brought thee to this hall to-day,And dared so rash a youth admitTo council where the wisest sit.Presumptuous, wild, devoid of sense,Filled full of pride and insolence,Thv reckless tongue thou wilt not ruleThat speaks the counsel of a fool.Who in the fight may brook or shunThe arrows shot by Raghu's sonWith flame and fiery vengeance sped,Dire as his staff who rules the dead?

O Rávan, let thy people live,
And to the son of Raghu giveFair robes and gems and precious ore,And Sitá to his arms restore.'
p. 438
Footnotes
437:1 Trilohanatha, Lord of the Three Worlds, is a title 
of Indra.
437:2 The celestial elephant that carries Indra.
Next: Canto XVI.: Rávan's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVI.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.
Then, while his breast with fury swelled,
Thus Rávan spoke, as fate impelled:   'Better with foes thy dwelling make,Or house thee with the venomed snake,Than live with false familiar friendsWho further still thy foeman's ends.I know their treacherous mood, I knowTheir secret triumph at thy woe.They in their inward hearts despiseThe brave, the noble, and the wise,Grieve at their bliss with rancorous hate,And for their sorrows watch and wait:Scan every fault with curious eye,And each slight error magnify.Ask elephants who roam the wildHow were their captive friends beguiled.'For fire,' they cry, 'we little care,For javelin and shaft and snare:Our foes are traitors, taught to bindThe trusting creatures of their kind.'Still, still, shall blessings flow from cows, 
1
And Brahmans love their rigorous vows;Still woman change her restless will,And friends perfidious work us ill,

What though with conquering feet I tread
On every prostrate foeman's head;What though the worlds in abject fearTheir mighty lord in me revereThis thought my peace of mind destroysAnd robs me of expected joys.The lotus of the lake receivesThe glittering rain that gems its leaves,But each bright drop remains apart:So is it still with heart and heart,Deceitful as an autumn cloudWhich, though its thunderous voice be loud,On the dry earth no torrent sends,Such is the race of faithless friends,No riches of the bloomy sprayWill tempt the wandering bee to stayThat loves from flower to flower to range;And friends like thee are swift to change,Thou blot upon thy glorious line,If any giant's tongue but thineHad dared to give this base advice,He should not live to shame me twice,'   Then just Vibhíshan in the heatOf anger started from his seat,And with four captains of the bandSprang forward with his mace in hand;Then, fury flashing from his eye,Looked on the king and made reply:

   'Thy rights, O Rávan, I allow:
My brother and mine elder thou.Such, though from duty's path they stray,We love like fathers and obey,But still too bitter to be borneIs thy harsh speech of cruel scorn.The rash like thee, who spurn control,Nor check one longing of the soul,Urged by malignant fate repelThe faithful friend who counsels well,A thousand courtiers wilt thou meet,With flattering lips of smooth deceit;But rare are they whose tongue or earWill speak the bitter truth, or hear.Unclose thy blinded eyes and seeThat snares of death encompass thee,I dread, my brother, to beholdThe shafts of Ráma, bright with gold,Flash fury through the air, and redWith fires of vengeance strike thee dead,Lord, brother, King, again reflect,Nor this mine earnest prayer reject,O, save thyself, thy royal town,Thy people and thine old renown."
Footnotes

438:1 As producers of the ghi, clarified butter or 
sacrificial oil, used in fire-offerings.
Next: Canto XVII.: Vibhíshan's Flight.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVII.: VIBHÍSHAN'S FLIGHT.
Soon as his bitter words were said,
To Raghu's sons Vibhíshan fled. 1b
Their eyes the Vánar leaders raisedAnd on the air-borne Bákhshas gazed,Bright as a thunderbolt, in sizeLike Meru's peak that cleaves the skies,In gorgeous panoply arrayedLike Indra's self he stood displayed,And four attendants brave and boldShone by their chief in mail and gold.Sugríva then with dark surmiseBent on their forms his wondering eyes,And thus in hasty words confessedThe anxious doubt that moved his breast:' Look, look ye Vánars, and beware:That giant chief sublime in airWith other four in bright arrayComes armed to conquer and to slay.'
p. 439
Soon as his warning speech they heard,The Vánar chieftains undeterredSeized fragments of the rock and trees,

And made reply in words like these:
'We wait thy word: the order give,And these thy foes shall cease to live.Command us, mighty King, and allLifeless upon the earth shall fall.'   Meanwhile Vibhíshan with the fourStood high above the ocean shore.Sugríva and the chiefs he spied,And raised his mighty voice and cried:'From Rávan, lord of giants, IHis brother, named Vibhíshan, fly.From Janasthán he stole the childOf Janak by his art beguiled,And in his palace locked and barredSurrounds her with a Rákshas guard,I bade him, plied with varied lore,His hapless prisoner restore.But he, by Fate to ruin sent,No credence to my counsel lent,Mad as the fevered wretch who seesAnd scorns the balm to bring him ease.He scorned the sage advice I gave,He spurned me like a base-born slave.I left my children and my wife,And fly to Raghu's son for life.I pray thee, Vánar chieftain, speedTo him who saves in hour of need,And tell him famed in distant landsThat, suppliant here Vibhíshan stands.'

   The Rákshas ceased: Sugriva hied
To Raghu's noble son and cried:   'A stranger from the giant host,Borne o'er the sea, has reached the coastA secret foe, he comes to slay,As owls attack their heedless prey.'Tis thine, O King, in time of needTo watch, to counsel, and to lead,Our Vánar legions to dispose,And guard us from our crafty foes.Vibhíshan from the giants' isle.King Rávan's brother, comes with guileAnd, feigning from his king to flee,Seeks refuge Raghu's son, with thee.Arise, O Ráma, and preventBy bold attack his dark intent.Who comes in friendly guise preparedTo slay thee by his arts ensnared.'   Thus urged Sugríva famed for loreOf moving words, and spoke no more.Then Ráma thus in turn addressedThe bold Hanúmán and the rest:'Chiefs of the Vanár legions eachOf you heard Sugríva's speech.What think ye now in time of fear,When peril and distress are near,In every doubt the wise dependFor counsel on a faithful friend'

   They heard his gracious words, and then
Spake reverent to the lord of men:'O Raghu's son, thou knowest wellAll things of heaven and earth and hell.'Tis but thy friendship bids us speakThe counsel Ráma need not seek.So duteous, brave, and true art thou,Heroic, faithful to thy vow.Deep in the scriptures, trained and tried,Still in thy friends wilt thou confide.Let each of us in turn impartThe secret counsel of his heart,And strive to win his chief's assent.By force of wisest argument.'   They ceased and Angad thus began:'With jealous eye the stranger scan:Not yet with trusting heart receiveVibhíshan, nor his tale believe.These giants wandering far and wideTheir evil nature falsely hide,And watching with malignant skillAssail us when we fear no ill.Well ponder every hope and fearUntil thy doubtful course be clear;Then own his merit or detectHis guile, and welcome or reject.'   Then Sarabhu the bold and braveIn turn his prudent sentence gave:'Yea, Ráma, send a skilful spy

With keenest tact to test and try.
Then let the stranger, as is just,Obtain or be refused thy trust.'   Then he whose heart was rich in storeOf scripture's life-directing lore.King Jámbaván, stood forth and cried:'Suspect, suspect a foe alliedWith Rávan lord of Lanká's isle,And Rákshas sin and Rákshas guile."   Then Maiuda, wisest chief, who knewThe wrong, the right, the false, the true,Pondered a while, then silence broke,And thus his sober counsel spoke:'Let one with gracious speech draw nearAnd gently charm Vibhíshan's ear,Till he the soothing witchery feelAnd all his secret heart reveal.So thou his aims and hopes shalt know,And hail the friend or shun the foe.'   'Not he,' Hanúmán cried, 'not heWho taught the Gods, 
1 may rival thee,
Supreme in power of quickest sense,First in the art of eloquence.But hear me soothly speak, O King,And learn the hope to which I cling.Vibhíshan comes no cratty spy:Urged by his brother's fault to fly.With righteous soul that loathes the sin,He fled from Lanká and his kin.

p. 440
If strangers question, doubt will rise
And chill the heart of one so wise.Marred by distrust the parle will end,And then wilt lose a faithful friend.Nor let it seem so light a thingTo sound a stranger's heart, O King.And he, I ween, whate'er he say,Will ne'er an evil thought betray.He comes a friend in happy time,Loathing his brother for his crime.His ear has heard thine old renown,The might that struck King Báli down,And set Sugríva on the throne.And looking now to thee aloneHe comes thy matchless aid to winAnd punish Rávan for his sin.Thus have I tried thy heart to move,And thus Vibhíshan's truth to prove.Still in his friendship I confide;But ponder, wisest, and decide.'
Footnotes
438:1b This dessertion to the enemy is somewhat 

abrupt, and is narrated with brevity not usual with 
Válmíki. In the Bengal recension the preceding speakers and speeches differ considerably from those given in the text which I follow. Vibhishan is kicked from his seat by Rávan, and then, after telling his mother what has happened, he flies to Mount Kailása where he has an interview with Siva, and by his advice seeks Ráma and the Vanar army.
439:1 Vrihuspatí the preceptor of the Gods.
Next: Canto XVIII.: Ráma's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XVIII.: RÁMA'S SPEECH.
Then Ráma's rising doubt was stilled,
And friendly thoughts his bosom filled.Thus, deep in Scripture's lore, he spake:'The suppliant will I ne'er forsake,Nor my protecting aid refuseWhen one in name of friendship sues.Though faults and folly blot his fame,Pity and help he still may claim.'   He ceased: Sugríva bowed his headAnd pondered for a while, and said:   'Past number be his faults or few,What think ye of the Rákshas who,When threatening clouds of danger rise,Deserts his brother's side and flies?Say, Vánars, who may hope to findTrue friendship in his faithless kind?'   The son of Raghu heard his speech:He cast a hasty look on eachOf those brave Vánar chiefs, and whileUpon his lips there played a smile,To Lakshman turned and thus expressedThe thoughts that moved his gallant breast:'Well versed in Scripture's lore, and sageAnd duly reverent to age,

Is he, with long experience stored,
Who counsels like this Vánar lord.Yet here, methinks, for searching eyeaSome deeper, subtler matter lies.To you and all the world are knownThe perils of a monarch's throne,While foe and stranger, kith and kinBy his misfortune trust to win.By hope of *such advantage led,Vibhíshan o'er the sea has fled.
He in his brother's stead would reign,
And our alliance seeks to gain;And we his offer may embrace,A stranger and of alien race.But if he comes a spy and foe,What power has he to strike a blowIn furtherance of his close design?What is his strength compared with mine?And can I, Vánar King, forgetThe great, the universal debt,Ever to aid and welcome thoseWho pray for shelter, friends or foes?Hast thou not heard the deathless praiseWon by the dove in olden days,Who conquering his fear and hateWelcomed the slayer of his mate,And gave a banquet, to refreshThe weary fowler, of his flesh?

Now hear me, Vánar King, rehearse
What Kandu  1 spoke in ancient verse,
Saint Kanva's son who loved the truthAnd clave to virtue from his youth:'Strike not the suppliant when he standsAnd asks thee with beseeching handsFor shelter: strike him not althoughHe were thy father's mortal foe.No, yield him, be he proud or meek,The shelter which he comes to seek,And save thy foeman, if the deedShould cost thy life, in desperate need.'And shall I hear the wretched cry,And my protecting aid deny?Shall I a suppliant's prayer refuse,And heaven and glory basely lose?No, I will do for honour sakeE'en as the holy Kandu spake,Preserve a hero's name from stain,And bliss in heaven and glory gain.Bound by a solemn vow I swareThat all my saving help should shareWho sought me in distress and cried,'Thou art my hope, and none beside,'Then go, I pray thee, Vánar King,Vibhíshan to my presence bring.Yea, were he Rávan's self, my vowForbids me to reject him now.'   He ceased: the Vánar king approved;

And Ráma toward Vibhíshan moved.
So moves, a brother God to greet,Lord Indra from his heavenly seat.
p. 441
Footnotes
440:1 In Book II. Canto XXI, Kandu is mentioned by 
Ráma as an example of filial obedience. At the 
command of his father he is said to have killed a cow.
Next: Canto XIX.: Vibhíshan's Counsel.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XIX.: VIBHÍSHAN'S COUNSEL.
When Raghu's son had owned his claim
Down from the air Vibhíshan came,And with his four attendants bentAt Ráma's feet most reverent.   'O Ráma,' thus he cried, 'in meVibhíshan, Rávan's brother see.By him disgraced thine aid I seek,Sure refuge of the poor and weak.From Lanká, friends, and wealth I fly.And reft of all on thee rely.On thee, the wretch's firmest friend,My kingdom, joys, and life depend.'   With glance of favour Ráma eyedThe Rákshas chief and thus replied:   'First from thy lips I fain would hearEach brighter hope, each darker fear.Speak, stranger, that I well may knowThe strength and weakness of the foe.'   He ceased: the Rákshas chief obeyed,And thus in turn his answer made:   'O Prince, the Self-existent gaveThis boon to Rávan; he may braveAll foes in fight; no fiend or snake,Gandharva, God, his life may take.

His brother Kumbhakarna vies
In might with him who rules the skies.The captain of his armies--famePerhaps has taught the warrior's name--Is terrible Prahanta, whoKing Manibhadra's  
1 self o'erthrew.
Where is the warrior found to faceYoung Indrajit, when armed with braceAnd guard  
2 and bow he stands in mail
And laughs at spear and arrowy hail?Within his city Lanká dwellTen million giants fierce and fell,Who wear each varied shape at willAnd eat the flesh of those they kill.These hosts against the Gods he led.And heavenly might discomfited.'   Then Ráma cried: 'I little heedGigantic strength or doughty deed.In spite of all their might has doneThe king, the captain, aud the sonShall fall beneath my fury dead,And thou shalt reign in Rávan's stead.He, though in depths of earth he dwell,Or seek protection down in hell,
Or kneel before the Sire supreme,
His forfeit life shall ne'er redeem.Yea, by my brothers' lives I swear,I will not to my home repair

Till Rávan and his kith and kin
Have paid in death the price of sin.'   Vibhíshan bowed his head and cried:'Thy conquering army will I guideTo storm the city of the foe,And aid the tyrant's overthrow.'Thus spake Vibhíshan: Ráma pressedThe Rákshas chieftain to his breast,And cried to Lakshman:'Haste and bringSea-water for the new-made king.'He spoke, and o'er Vibhíshan's headThe consecrating drops were shedMid shouts that hailed with one accordThe giants' king and Lanká's lord,   'Is there no way,' Hanúmán cried,'No passage o'er the boisterous tide?How may we lead the Vánar hostIn triumph to the farther coast?'Thus,' said Vibhíshan, 'I advise:Let Raghu's son in suppliant guiseEntreat the mighty Sea to lendHis succour and this cause befriend.His channels, as the wise have told,By Sagar's sons were dug of old,  
1b
Nor will high-thoughted Ocean scornA prince of Sagar's lineage born.'   He ceased; the prudent counsel wonThe glad assent of Raghu's son.Then on the ocean shore a bed

Of tender sacred grass was spread,
Where Ráma at the close of dayLike fire upon an altar lay.
Footnotes
441:1 A King of the Yakshas, or Kuvera himself, the 
God of Gold.
441:2 The brace protects the left arm from injury from the bow-string, and the guard protects the fingers of the 
right hand.
Next: Canto XX.: The Spies.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XX.: THE SPIES.
Sárdúla, Rávan's spy, surveyed
The legions on the strand arrayed.And bore, his bosom racked with fear,These tidings to the monarch's ear:   'They come, they come. A rushing tide,Ten leagues they spread from side to side,And on to storm thy citv press,Fierce rovers of the wilderness.Rich in each princely power and grace,The pride of Das'aratha's race,Ráma and Lakshman lead their bands,And halt them on the ocean sands.O Monarch, rise, this peril meet;Risk not the danger of defeat.
p. 442
First let each wiser art be tried;Bribe them, or win them, or divide.'Such was the counsel of the spy:And Rávan called to S'uka: 'Fly,Sugríva lord of Vánars seek,And thus my kingly message speak:'Great power and might and fame are thine.

Brave scion of a royal line,
King Riksharajuas' son, in theeA brother and a friend I see.How wrouged by me canst thou complain?What profit here pretend to gain?If from the wood the wife I stoleOf Ráma of the prudent soul,What cause hast thou to mourn the theft?Thou art not injured or bereft.Return, O King, thy steps retraceAnd seek thy mountain dwelling-place.No, never may thy hosts withinMy Lanká's walls a footing win.A mighty town whose strength defiesThe gathered armies of the skies.'   He ceased: obedient S'uka heard;With wings and plumage of a birdHe rose in eager speed and throughThe air upon his errand flew.Borne o'er the sea with rapid wingHe stood above the Vánar king,And spoke aloud, sublime in air.Thu message he was charged so bear.The Vánar heard the words he spoke,And quick redoubling stroke on strokeOn head and pinions hemmed him roundAnd bore him struggling to the grouud.The Rákshas wounded and distressedThese words to Raghu's son addressed:

   'Quick, quick! This Vánar host * restrain,
For heralds never must be slain.To him alone, a wretch untrue,The punishment of death is dueWho leaves his master's speech unsaidAnd speaks another word * instead'Moved by the suppliant speech and praverUp sprang the prince and cried, forbear.Saved from his wild assailant's blowsAgain the Rákshas herald roseAnd borne on light wings to the skyAddressed Sugríva from on high:'O Vánar Monarch, chief enduedWith power and wonderous fortitude.What answer is my king the fearAnd scourge of weeping worlds, to hear?''Go tell thy lord,' Sugríva cried.'Thou, Ráma's foe, art thus defied.His arm the guilty Bali slew;Thus, tyrant, shalt thee perish too,Thy sons, thy friends, proud King and allThy kith and kin with thee shall fall;And emptied of the giant's brood,Burnt * Lanká be a solitude.
Fly to the Sun-God's pathway, go
And hide thee deep in hell below:In vain from Ráma shalt thou fleeThough heavenly warriors fight for thee.

Thine arm subdued, securely bold,
The Vulture-king infirm and old:But will thy puny strength availWhen Raghu's wrathful sons assail?A captive in thy palace liesThe lady of the lotus eyes:Thou knowest not how fierce and strongIs he whom thou hast dared to wrong.The best of Raghu's lineage, heWhose conquering hand shall punish thee.'   He ceased: and Augad raised a cry;'This is no herald but a spy.Above thee from his airy postHis rapid eye surveyed our host,Where with advantage he might scanOur gathered strength from rear to van,Bind him. Vánars, bind the spy,Nor let him back to Lanká fly.'   They hurled the Rákshas to the ground,Thiey grasped his neck, his pinions bound,And firmly held bear while * in vainHis voice was lifted to complain.But Ráma's heart inclined to spare,He listened to his plaint and prayer,And cried aloud: 'O Vánars, cease;The captive from his bonds release.'

Footnotes
441:1b The story is told in Book I. Cantos XL., XLI., 
XLII.
Next: Canto XXI.: Ocean Threatened.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXI.: OCEAN THREATENED.
His hands in reverence Ráma raised
And southwared o'er the ocean gazed:Then on the sacred grass that madeHis lowly couch* his limbs* he laid,His head on that strong arm reclinedWhich Sitá, best of womankind,Had loved in happier days to holdWith soft arms decked* with pearls and gold.Then rising from his bed of grass,'This day,' he cried, 'the host shall passTriumphant to the southern shore,Or Ocean's self shall be no more *.'Thus vowing in his constant breastAgain he turned him to his rest,And there, his eyes in slumber closed,Silent beside the sea reposed.Thrice rose the Day-God thrice he set,The lord of Ocean came not yet,Thrice came the night, but Raghu's sonNo answer by his service won.To Lakshman thus the hero cried,His eyes aflame with wrath and pride:   'In vain the softer gifts that graceThe good are offered to the base. *

Long-suffering, patience, gentle speech
p. 443
Their thankless hearts can never reach.
The world to him its honour paysWhose ready tongue himself can praise.Who scorns the true, and hates the right,Whose hand is ever raised to smite.Each milder art is tried in vain:It wins no glory, but disdain.And victory owns no softer charmThan might which nerves a warrior's arm.My humble suit is still deniedBy Ocean's overweening pride.This day the monsters of the deepIn throes of death shall wildly leap.My shafts shall rend the serpents curledIn caverns of the watery world,Disclose each sunless depth and bareThe tangled pearl and coral there.Away with mercy! at a timeLike this compassion is a crime.Welcom, the battle and the foe! My bow! my arrows and my bow!This day the Vánars' feet shall treadThe conquered Sea's exhausted bed,And he who never feared beforeShall tremble to his farthest shore."

   Red flashed his eyes with angry glow;
He stood and grasped his mighty bow,Terrific as the fire of doomWhose quenchless flames the world consume.   His clanging cord the archer drew.And swift the fiery arrows flewFierce as the flashing levin sentBy him who rules the firmament.Down through the startled waters spedEach missile with its flaming head.The foamy billows rose and sank,And dashed upon the trembling bankSea monsters of tremendous formWith crash and roar of thunder storm.Still the wild waters rose and fellCrowned with white foam and pearl and shell.   Each serpent, startled from his rest,Raised his fierce eyes and glowing crest.And prisoned Dánavs  
1 where they dwelt
In depths below the terror felt.Again upon his string he laidA flaming shaft, but Lakshman stayedHis arm, with gentle reasoning triedTo soothe his angry mood, and cried:'Brother, reflect: the wise controlThe rising passions of the soul.Let Ocean grant, without thy threat,The boon on which thy heart is set.That gracious lord will ne'er refuse

When Ráma son of Raghu sues.'
He ceased: and voices from the airFell clear and loud, Spare, Ráma, spare.
Footnotes
443:1 Fiends and enemies of the Gods.
Next: Canto XXII.: 

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXII.: 
With angry menace Rama, best
Of Raghu's sons, the Sea addressed:'With fiery flood of arrowy rainThy channels will I dry and drain.And I and all the Vánnr hostWill reach on foot the farther coast.Thou shalt not from destruction saveThe creatures of the teeming wave,And lapse of time shall ne'er effaceThe memory of the dire disgrace'   Thus spoke the warrior, and preparedThe mortal shaft which never spared,Known mystic weapon, by the nameOf Brahma, red with quenchless flarmeGreat terror, as he strained the bow,Struck heaven above and earth belowThrough echoing skies the thunder pealedAnd startled mountains rocked and reeledThe earth was black with sudden nightAnd heaven was blotted from the sight.Then ever and anon the glareOf meteors shot through murky air,And with a wild terrific soundRed lightnings struck the trembling ground.

In furious gusts the fierce wind blew:
Tall trees it shattered and overthrew,And, smiting with a giant's stroke,Huge masses from the mountain broke.A cry of terror long and shrillCame from each valley, plain, and hill.Each ruined dale, each riven peakRe-echoed with a wail or shriek.   While Ragbu's son undaunted gazedThe waters of the deep were raised,And, still uplifted more and more,Leapt in wild flood upon the shore.Still Ráma looked upon the tideAnd kept his post unterrified.Then from the seething flood uprearedMajestic Ocean's form appeared,As rising from his eastern heightSprings through the sky the Lord of Light.Attendant on their monarch cameSea serpents with their eyes aflame.Like lazulite mid burning goldHis form was wondrous to behold.Bright with each fairest precious stoneA chain about his neck was thrown.Calm shone his lotus eyes beneathThe blossoms of his heavenly wreath,And many a pearl and sea-born gemFlashed in the monarch's diadem.There Gangá, tributary queen.

And Sindhu  1b by his lord, were seen,
p. 444
And every stream and brook renowned
In ancient story girt him round.Then, as the waters rose and swelled,The king with suppliant hands upheld,His glorious head to Ráma bentAnd thus addressed him reverent:'Air, ether, fire, earth, water, trueTo nature's will, their course pursue;And I, as ancient laws ordain,Unfordable must still remain.Yet, Raghu's son, my counsel hear:I ne'er for love or hope or fearWill pile my waters in a heapAnd leave a pathway through the deep.Still shall my care for thee provideAn easy passage o'er the tide,And like a city's paven streetShall be the road beneath thy feet.'He ceased: and Ráma spoke again:'This spell is ne'er invoked in vain.Where shall the magic shaft, to spendThe fury of its might, descend?''Shoot,' Ocean cried, 'thine arrow forthWith all its fury to the north.Where sacred Drumakulya lies,

Whose glory with thy glory vies,
There dwells a wild Abhíra  1 race,
As vile in act as foul of face,Fierce Dasyus  
2 who delight in ill,
And drink my tributary rill.My soul no longer may endureTheir neighbourhood and touch impure.At these, O son of Raghu, aimThine arrow with the quenchless flame.'  Swift from the bow, as Ráma drewHis cord, the fiery arrow flew.Earth groaned to feel the wound, and sentA rush of water through the rent;And famed for ever is the wellOf Vrana  
3 where the arrow fell.
Then every brook and lake besideThroughout the region Ráma dried.But yet he gave a boon to blessAnd fertilize the wilderness:No fell disease should taint the air,And sheep and kine should prosper there:Earth should produce each pleasant root,The stately trees should bend with fruit;Oil, milk, and honey should abound,And fragrant herbs should clothe the  ground.Then spake the king of brooks and seasTo Raghu's son in words like these:'Now let a wondrous task be done

By Nala, Vis'vakarmá's son.
Who, born of one of Vánar race,
Inherits by his father's graceA share of his celestial art.Call Nala to perform his part,And he, divinely taught and skilled,A bridge athwart the sea shall build.'  He spoke and vanished Nala, bestOf Vánar chiefs, the king addressed:'O'er the deep sea where monsters playA bridge, O Ráma, will I lay;For, sharer of my father's skill,Mine is the power and mine the will.'Tis vain to try each gentler artTo bribe and soothe the thankless heart;In vain on such is mercy spent;It yields to naught but punishment.Through fear alone will Ocean nowA passage o'er his waves allow.My mother, ere she bore her son,This boon from Vis'vakarmá won:'O Mandari, thy child shall beIn skill and glory next to me.'But why unbidden should I fillThine ear with praises of my skill?Command the Vánar hosts to layFoundations for the bridge to-day.'   He spoke: and swift at Ráma's best

Up sprang the Vánars from their rest,
The mandate of the king obeyedAnd sought the forest's mighty shade.Unrooted trees to earth they threw,And to the sea the timber drew.The stately palm was bowed and bent,As'okas from the ground were rent,And towering Sáls and light bamboos,And trees with flowers of varied hues,With loveliest creepers wreathed and crowned,Shook, reeled, and fell upon the ground.With mighty engines piles of stoneAnd seated hills were overthrown:Unprisoned waters sprang on high,In rain descending from the sky:And ocean with a roar and swellHeaved wildly when the mountains fell.Then the great bridge of wondrous strengthWas built, a hundred leagues in length.Rocks huge as autumn clouds bound fastWith cordage from the shore were cast,And fragments of each riven hill,And trees whose flowers adorned them still.Wild was the tumult, loud the dinAs ponderous rocks went thundering in.Ere set of sun, so toiled each crew,Ten leagues and four the structure grew;The labours of the second dayGave twenty more of ready way,

And on the fifth, when sank the sun,
The whole stupendous work was done.O'er the broad way the Vánars sped,Nor swayed it with their countless tread.
p. 445
Exultant on the ocean strandVibhíshan stood, and, mace in hand,Longed eager for the onward way,And chafed impatient at delay.Then thus to Ráma trained and triedIn battle King Sugríva cried:'Come, Hauumán's broad back ascend;Let Angad help to Lakshman lend.These high above the sea shall bearTheir burthen through the ways of air.'   So, with Sugríva, borne o'erheadIkshváku's sons the legions led.Behind, the Vánar hosts pursuedTheir march in endless multitude.Some skimmed the surface of the wave,To some the air a passage gave.Amid their ceaseless roar the soundOf Ocean's fearful voice was drowned,As o'er the bridge by Nala plannedThey hastened on to Lanká's strand,Where, by the pleasant brooks, mid treesLoaded with fruit, they took their ease.

Footnotes
443:1b The Indus.
444:1 Cowherds, sprung from a Bráhman and a woman 
of the medical tribe, the modern Ahírs.
444:2 Barbarians or outcasts.
444:3 Vrana means wound or rent.
Next: Canto XXIII.: The Omens.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIII.: THE OMENS.
Then Ráma, peerless in the skill
That marks each sign of good and ill,Strained his dear brother to his breast,And thus with prudent words addressed:'Now, Lakshman, by the water's sideIn fruitful groves the host divide,That warriors of each woodland raceMay keep their own appointed place.Dire is the danger: loss of friends,Of Vánars and of bears, impends.Distained with dust the breezes blow,And earth is shaken from below.The tall hills rock from foot to crown,And stately trees come toppling down.In threatening shape, with voice of fear,The clouds like cannibals appear,And rain in fitful torrents, redWith sanguinary drops, is shed.Long streaks of lurid light investThe evening skies from east to west.And from the sun at times a ballOf angry fire is seen to fall.From every glen and brake is heardThe boding voice of beast and bird:

From den and lair night-prowlers run
And shriek against the falling sun.Up springs the moon, but hot and redKills the sad night with woe and dread;No gentle lustre, but the gloom.That heralds universal doom.A cloud of dust and vapour marsThe beauty of the evening stars,And wild and fearful is the skyAs though the wreck of worlds were nigh.Around our heads in boding flightWheel hawk and vulture, crow and kite;And every bird of happy noteShrieks terror from his altered throat.Sword, spear and shaft shall strew the plainDyed red with torrents of the slain.To-day the Vánar troops shall closeAround the city of our foes.'
Next: Canto XXIV.: The Spy's Return.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIV.: THE SPY'S RETURN.
As shine the heavens with autumn's moon
Refulgent in the height of noon,So shone with light which Ráma gaveThat army of the bold and brave,As from the sea it marched awayIn war's magnificent array,And earth was shaken by the beatAnd trampling of unnumbered feet.Then to the giants' ears were borne,The mingled notes of drum and horn,And clash of tambours smote the sky,And shouting and the battle cry.The sound of martial strains inspiredEach chieftain, and his bosom fired:While giants from their walls replied,And answering shouts the foe defied,Then Ráma looked on Lanká whereBright banners floated in the air,And, pierced with anguish at the view.His loving thoughts to Sitá flew.'There, prisoned by the giant, liesMy lady of the tender eyes,Like Rohini the queen of starsO'erpowered by the fiery Mars.'

Then turned he to his brother chief
And cried in agony of grief:'See on the hill, divinely plannedAnd built by Vis'vakarmá's hand,The towers and domes of Lanká riseIn peerless beauty to the skies.Bright from afar the city shinesWith gleam of palaces and shrines,Like pale clouds through the region spreadBv Vishnu's self inhabited.Fair gardens grow, and woods betweenThe stately domes are fresh and green,Where trees their bloom and fruit display,And sweet birds sing on every spray.Each bird is mad with joy, and beesSing labouring in the bloomy treesOn branches by the breezes bowed.Where the gay Koïl's voice is loud.'   This said, he ranged with warlike artEach body of the host apart.
p. 446
'There in the centre,' Ráma cried,'Be Angad's place by Níla's side.Let Rishabh of impetuous mightBe lord and leader on the right,And Gandhamádan, next in rank,Be captain of the farther flank.

Lakshman and I the hosts will lead,
And Jámbaván of ursine breed,With bold Sushen unused to fear,And Vegadarsí, guide the rear.'   Thus Ráma spoke: the chiefs obeyed;And all the Vánar hosts arrayedShowed awful as the autumn skyWhen clouds embattled form on high.Their arms were mighty trees o'erthrownAnd massy blocks of mountain stone.One hope in every warlike breast,One firm resolve, they onward pressed,To die in fight or batter downThe walls and towers of Lanká's town.   Those marshalled legions Ráma eyed,And thus to King Sugríva cried:'Now, Monarch, ere the hosts proceed,Let S'uka, Rávan's spy, be freed.'He spoke: the Vánar gave consentAnd loosed him from imprisonment:And S'uka, trembling and afraid,His homeward way to Rávan made.Loud laughed the lord of Lanká's isle:'Where hast thou stayed this weary while?'Why is thy plumage marred, and whyDo twisted cords thy pinions tie?Say, comest thou in evil plightThe victim of the Vánars' spite?'   He ceased: the spy his fear controlled,

And to the king his story told:
'I reached the ocean's distant shore,Thy message to the king I bore,In sudden wrath the Vánars rose,They struck me down with furious blows;They seized me helpless on the ground,My plumage rent, my pinions bound.They would not, headlong in their ire,Consider, listen, or inquire;So fickle, wrathful, rough and rudeIs the wild forest multitude.There, marshalling the Vánar bands,King Ráma with Sugríva stands,Ráma the matchless warrior, whoVirádha and Kabandha slew,Khara, and countless giants more.And tracks his queen to Lankás shore.A bridge athwart the sea was cast,And o'er it have his legions passed.Hark I heralded by horns and drumsThe terrible avenger comes.E'en now the giants' isle he fillsWith warriois huge as clouds and hills,And burning with vindictive hateWill thunder soon at Lanká's gate.
Yield or oppose him: choose between
Thy safety and the Maithil queen.'   He ceased: the tyrant's eyeballs blazed

With fury as his voice he raised:
'No, if the dwellers of the sky,Gandharvas, fiends assail me, IWill keep the Maithil lady still,Nor yield her back for fear or ill.When shall my shafts with iron bailMy foeman, Raghu's son, assail,Thick as the bees with eager wingBeat on the flowery trees of spring?O, let me meet my foe at length,And strip him of his vaunted strength,Fierce as the sun who shines afarStealing the light of every star.Strong as the sea's impetuous mightMy ways are like the tempest's flight;But Ráma knows not this, or heIn terror from my face would flee.'
Next: Canto XXV.: Rávan's Spies.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXV. 1: RÁVAN'S SPIES.
When Ráma and the host he led
Across the sea had safely sped.Thus Rávan, moved by wrath and pride.To S'uka and to Sáran cried:'O counsellors, the Vánar hostHas passed the sea from coast to coast,And Das'aratha's son has wroughtA wondrous deed surpassing thought.And now in truth I needs must knowThe strength and number of the foe.Go ye, to Ráma's host repairAnd count me all the legions there.Learn well what power each captain leadsHis name and fame for warlike deeds.Learn by what artist's wondrous aidThat bridge athwart the sea was made;Learn how the Vánar hoat came o'erAnd halted on the island shore.Mark Ráma son of Raghu well;His valour, strength, and weapons tell.Watch his advisers one by one,And Lakshman, Raghu's younger son.Learn with observant eyes, and bringUnerring tidings to your king.'

   He ceased: then swift in Vánar guise
Forth on their errand sped the spies.They reached the Vánars, and, dismayed,Their never-ending lines surveyd:Nor would they try, in mere despair,To count the countless legions there,
p. 447
That crowded valley, plain and hill,That pressed about each cave and rill.Though sea-like o'er the land were spreadThe endless hosts which Ráma led,The bridge by thousands yet was lined,And eager myriads pressed behind.But sage Vibhíshan's watchful eyesHad marked the giants in disguise.He gave command the pair to seize,And told the tale in words like these:   'O Ráma these, well known erewhile,Are giant sons of Lanká's isle.Two counsellors of Rávan sentTo watch the invading armament.'  Vibhíshan ceased: at Ráma's lookThe Rákshas envoys quailed and shook;Then suppliant hand to hand they pressedAnd thus Ikshváku's son addressed:'O Ráma, bear the truth we speak:Our monarch Rávan bade us seek

The Vánar legions and survey
Their numbers, strength, and vast array'.   Then Ráma, friend and hope and guideOf suffering creatures, thus replied:   'Now giants, if your eyes have scannedOur armies, numbering every band,Marked lord and chief, and gazed their fill,Return to Rávan when ye will.It aught remain, if aught anewYe fain would scan with closer view,Vibhíshan, ready at your call,Will lead you forth and show you all.Think not of bonds and capture; fearNo loss of life, no peril here:For, captive, helpless and unarmed,An envoy never should be harmed.Again to Lanká's town repair,Speed to the giant monarch there,And be these words to Rávan told,Fierce brother of the Lord of Gold:'Now, tyrant, tremble for thy sin:Call up thy friends, thy kith and kin,And let the power and might be seenWhich made thee bold to steal my queen.To-morrow shall thy mournful eyeBehold thy bravest warriors die,And Lanká's city, tower and wall,Struck by my fiery shafts, will fall.Then shall my vengeful blow descend

Its rage on thee and thine to spend,
Fierce as the fiery bolt that flewFrom heaven against the Dánav crew,Mid these rebellious demons sentBy him who rules the firmament.'   Thus spake Ikshváku's son, and ceased:The giants from their bonds releasedLauded the King with glad accord,And hasted homeward to their lord.Before the tyrant side by sideS'uka and Sáran stood and cried:
'Vibhíshan seized us, King, and fain
His helpless captives would have slain.But glorious Ráma saw us; he,Great-hearted hero, made us free.There in one spot our eyes beheldFour chiefs on earth unparalleled,Who with the guardian Gods may vieWho rule the regions of the sky.There Ráma stood, the boast and prideOf Raghu's race, by Lakshman's side.There stood the sage Vibhíshan, thereSugríva strong beyond compare.These four alone can batter downGate, rampart, wall, and Lanka's town.Nay, Ráma matchless in his form,A single foe, thy town would storm:So wondrous are his weapons, he

Needs not the succour of the three.
Why speak we of the countless trainThat fills the valley, hill and plain,The millions of the Vánar breedWhom Ráma and Sugríva lead?O King, be wise, contend no more,And Sitá to her lord restore.'
Footnotes
446:1 Here in the Bengal recension (Gorresio's edition), 
begins Book VI.
Next: Canto XXVI.: The Vánar Chiefs.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVI.: THE VÁNAR CHIEFS.
'Not if the Gods in heaven who dwell,
Gandharvas, and the fiends of hellIn banded opposition riseAgainst me, will I yield my prize.Still trembling from the ungentle toucbOf Vánar hands ye fear too much,And bid me, heedless of the shame,Give to her lord the Maithil dame.'   Thus spoke the king in stern reproof;Then mounted to his palace roofAloft o'er many a story raised,And on the lands beneath him gazed.There by his faithful spies he stoodAnd looked on sea and hill and wood.There stretched before him far awayThe Vánars' numberless array:Scarce could the meadows' tender greenBeneath their trampling feet be seen.He looked a while with furious eye,Then questioned thus the nearer spy:'Bend, Sáran, bend thy gaze, and showThe leaders of the Vánar foeTell me their heroes' names, and teachThe valour, power and might of each.'

Obedient Sáran eyed the van,
The leaders marked, and thus began:That chief conspicuous at the headOf warriors in the forest bred,Who hither bends his ruthless eyeAnd shouts his fearful battle cry:
p. 448
Whose voice with pealing thunder shakesAll Lanká, with the groves and lakesAnd hills that tremble at the sound,Is Nila, for his might renowned:First of the Vánar lords controlledBy King Sugríva lofty-souled.He who his mighty arm extends,And his fierce eye on Lanká bends,In stature like a stately tower,In colour like a lotus flower,Who with his wild earth-shaking criesThee, Rávan, to the field defies,Is Angad, by Sugríva's careAnointed his imperial heir:In wondrous strength, in martial firePeer of King Bali's self, his sire;For Ráma's sake in arms arrayedLike Varun called to S'akra's aid.Behind him, girt by warlike bands,

Nala the mighty Vánar stands,
The son of Vis'vakarmá, heWho built the bridge athwart the sea.Look farther yet, O King, and markThat chieftain clothed in Sandal bark.'Tis S'weta, famed among his peers,A sage whom all his race reveres.See, in Sugríva's ear he speaks,Then, hasting back, his post reseeks,And turns his practised eye to viewThe squadrons he has formed anew.Next Kumud stands who roamed of yoreOn Gomati's  
1 delightful shore,
Feared where the waving woods investHis seat on Mount Sanrochan's crest.Next him a chieftain strong and dread,Comes Chanda at his legions' head;Exulting in his warrior mightHe hastens, burning for the fight.And boasts that his unaided powersShall cast to earth thy walls and towers.Mark, mark that chief of lion gait,Who views thee with a glance of hateAs though his very eyes would burnThe city walls to which they turn:'Tis Rambha, Vánar king; he dwellsIn Krishnagiri's tangled dells,Where Vindhya's pleasant slopes are spreadAnd fair Sudars'an lifts his head.

There, listening with erected ears,
S'arabha, mighty chief, appears.His soul is burning for the strife,Nor dreads the jeopardy of life.He trembles as he moves, for ire,And bends around his glance of fire.Next, like a cloud that veils the sides,A chieftain of terrific size,Conspicuous mid the Vánars, comesWith battle shout like rolling drums,'Tis Panas, trained in war and tried,
Who dwells on Páriyátra's side.
He, far away, the chief who throwsA glory o'er the marshalled rowsThat ranged behind their captain standExulting on the ocean strand,Is Vinata the fierce in fight.Preëminent like Dardur's height.That chieftain bending down to drinkOn lovely Vená's verdant brink,Is Krathan; now he lifts his eyesAnd thee to mortal fray defies.Next Gavaya comes, whose haughty mindScorns all the warriors of his kind.He comes to trample - such his boast -On Lanká with his single host.'

Footnotes
448:1 The Goomtee.
Next: Canto XXVII.: The Vánar Chiefs.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVII.: THE VÁNAR CHIEFS.
'Yet more remain, brave chiefs who stake
Their noble lives for Ráma's sake.See, glorious, golden-coated, oneWho glisters like the morning sun,Whom thousands of his race surround,'Tis Hara for his strength renowned,Next comes a mighty chieftain, heWhose legions, armed with rock and tree,Press on, in numbers passing tale,The ramparts of our town to scale.O Rávan, see the king advanceTerrific with his fiery glance,Girt by the bravest of his train,Majestic as the God of Rain,Parjanya, when his host of cloudsAbout the king, embattled, crowds:On Rikshaván's high mountain nursed,In Narmadá  
1b he slakes his thirst,
Dhúmra, proud ursine chief, who leadsWild warriors whom the forest breeds.His brother, next in strength and age,In Jámbaván the famous sage.Of yore his might and skill he lentTo him who rules the firmament,

And Indra's liberal boons repaid
The chieftain for the timely aid.There like a gloomy cloud that fliesBorne by the tempest through the skies,Pramáthí stands: he roamed of yoreThe forest wilds on Gangá's shore,Where elephants were struck with dreadAnd trembling at his coming fled.There on his foes he loved to sateThe old hereditary hate.  
2b
p. 449
Look, Gaja and Gaváksha showTheir lust of battle with the foe.See Nala burning for the fray,And Níla chafing at delay,Behind the eager captains pressWild hosts in numbers numberless,And each for Ráma's sake would fallOr force his way through Lanká's wall.'
Footnotes
448:1b The Anglicized Nerbudda.

448:2b According to a Pauranik legend Kes'arí 
Hanúmán's putative father had killed an Asur or demon 
who appeared in the p. 449 form of an elephant, and 
hence arose the hostility between Vánars and elephants.
Next: Canto XXVIII.: The Chieftains.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXVIII.: THE CHIEFTAINS.
There Sáran ceased: then S'uka broke
The silence and to Rávan spoke:'O Monarch, yonder chiefs survey:Like elephants in size are they,And tower like stately trees that growWhere Gangá's nursing waters flow;Yea, tall as mountain pines that flingLong shadows o'er the snow-crowned king.They all in wild Kishkindhá dwellAnd serve their lord Sugríva well.The Gods' and bright Gandharvas' seed,They take each form that suits their need.Now farther look, O Monarch, whereThose chieftains stand, a glorious pair,Conspicuous for their godlike frames;Dwivid and Mainda are their names.Their lips the drink of heaven have known,And Brahmá claims them for his own.That chieftain whom thine eyes beholdRefulgent like a hill of gold,Before whose wrathful might the seaRoused from his rest would turn and flee,The peerless Vánar, he who cameTo Lanká for the Maithil dame,

The Wind-God's son Hamúmán; thou
Hast seen him once, behold him now.Still nearer let thy glance be bent,And mark that prince preëminentMid chieftains for his strength and sizeAnd splendour of his lotus eyes.Far through the worlds his virtues shine,The glory of Ikshváku's line.The path of truth he never leaves,And still through all to duty cleaves.Deep in the Vedas, skilled to wieldThe mystic shafts to him revealed:Whose flaming darts to heaven ascend,And through the earth a passage rend:In might like him who rules the sky;Like Yama, when his wrath grows high:Whose queen, the darling of his soul.Thy magic art deceived and stole:There royal Ráma stands and longsFor battle to avenge his wrongs.
Near on his right a prince, in hue
Like pure gold freshly burnished, view:Broad is his chest, his eye is red,His black hair curls about his head:'Tis Lakshman, faithful friend, who sharesHis brother's joys, his brother's cares.By Ráma's side he loves to standAnd serve him as his better hand,

For whose dear sake without a sigh
The warrior youth would gladly dieOn Ráma's left Vibhíshan view,With giants for his retinue:King-making drops have dewed his head,Appointed monarch in thy stead.Behold that chieftain sternly still,High towering like a rooted hill,Supreme in power and pride of place,The monarch of the Vánar race.Raised high above his woodland kind,In might and glory, frame and mind,His head above his host he showsConspicuous as the Lord of Snows.His home is far from hostile eyesWhere deep in woods Kishkindhá lies.A glistering chain which flowers bedeckWith burnished gold adorns his neck.Queen Fortune, loved by Gods and kings,To him her chosen favourite clings.That chain he owes to Ráma's grace,And Tárá and his kingly place.In him the great Sugríva know,Whom Ráma rescued from his foe.' 
1
Next: Canto XXIX.: S'árdúla Captured.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXIX.: S'ÁRDÚLA CAPTURED.
The giant viewed with earnest ken
The Vánars and the lords of men;Then thus, with grief and anger moved,In bitter tone the spies reproved:'Can faithful servants hope to pleaseTheir master with such fates as these?Or hope ye with wild words to wringThe bosom of your lord and king?Such words were better said by thoseWho come arrayed our mortal foes.In vain your ears have heard the sage,And listened to the lore of age,Untaught, though lectured many a day,The first great lesson, to obey,'Tis marvel Rávan reigns and rulesWhose counsellors are blind and fools.Has death no terrors that ye dareTo tempt your monarch to despair,
p. 450
From whose Imperial mandate flowDisgrace and honour, weal and woe?Yea, forest trees, when flames are fanned

About their scorching trunks, may stand;
But naught can set the sinner freeWhen kings the punishment decree.I would not in mine anger spareThe traitorous foe-praising pair,But years of faithful service pleadFor pardon, and they shall not bleed.Henceforth to me be dead: depart,Far from my presence and my heart.'   Thus spoke the angry king: the twoCried, Long live Rávan, and withdrew,The giant monarch turned and criedTo strong Mahodar at his side:'Go thou, and spies more faithful bring.More duteous to their lord the king.'   Swift at his word Mahodar shed,And came returning at the headOf long tried messengers, who bentBefore their monarch reverent.'Go quickly hence,' said Rávan 'scanWith keenest eyes the foeman's plan.Learn who, as nearest friends, adviseAnd mould each secret enterprise.Learn when he wakes and goes to rest,Sound every purpose of his breast.Learn what the prince intends to-day:Watch keenly all, and come away.'   With joy they heard the words he said:Then with S'árdúla at their head

About the giant king they went
With circling paces reverent.By fair Suvela's grassy sideThe chiefs of Raghu's race they spied,Where, shaded by the waving wood,Vibhíshan and Sugríva stood.A while they rested there and viewedThe Vánars' countless multitude.Vibhíshan with observant eyesKnew at a glance the giant spies,And bade the warriors of his trainBind the rash foes with cord and chain:'S'árdúla's is the sin,' he cried.He neath the Vánars' hands had died,But Ráma from their fury freedThe captive in his utmost need,And, merciful at sight of woe,Loosed all the spies and bade them go.Then home to Lanká's monarch fledThe giant chiefs discomfited.
Footnotes
449:1 Here follows the enumeration of Sugríva's forces 
which I do not attempt to follow. It soon reaches a 
hundred thousand billions.

Next: Canto XXX.: Sárdúla's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXX.: SÁRDÚLA'S SPEECH.
They told their lord that Ráma still
Lay waiting by Suvela's hill.
The tyrant, flushed with angry glow,
Heard of the coming of the foe,And thus with close inquiry pressedS'árdúla spokesman for the rest:'Why art thou sad, night-rover? speak:Has grief or terror changed thy cheek?Have the wild Vánars' hostile bandsAssailed thee with their mighty hands?   S'árdúla heard, but scarce might speak;His trembling tones were faint and weak;'O Giant King, in vain we tryThe purpose of the foe to spy.Their strength and number none may tell,And Ráma guards his legions well.He leaves no hope to prying eyes,And parley with the chiefs denies:Each road and path a Vánar guard,Of mountain size, has closed and barred.Soon as my feet an entrance foundBy giants was I seized and bound,And wounded sore I fell beneath

Their fists and knees and hands and teeth.
Then trembling, bleeding, wellnigh deadTo Ráma's presence was I led.He in his mercy stooped to save,And freedom to the captive gave.With rocks and shattered mountains heHas bridged his way athwart the sea,And he and all his legions waitEmbattled close to Lanká's gate.Soon will the host thy wall assail,And, swarming on, the rampart scale,Now, O my King, his consort yield,Or arm thee with the sword and shield.This choice is left thee: choose betweenThy safety and the Maithil queen. 
1
Next: Canto XXXI.: The Magic Head.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXI.: THE MAGIC HEAD.
The tyrant's troubled eye confessed
The secret fear that filled his breast.With dread of coming woe dismayedHe called his counsellors to aid;Then sternly silent, deep in thought,His chamber in the palace sought.Then, as the surest hope of all,The monarch bade his servants call
p. 451
Vidyujjihva, whom magic skillMade master of the means of ill.Then spake the lord of Lanka's isle:  'Come, Sita with thine arts beguile.With magic skill and deftest careA head like Ráma's own prepare.This head, long shafts and mighty bow,To Janak's daughter will we show.'   He ceased. Vidyujjihva obeyed,And wondrous magic skill displayed;And Rávan for the art he showedAn ornament of price bestowed.Then to the grove where Sitá lay

The lord of Lanká took his way.
Pale, wasted, weeping, on the groundThe melancholy queen he found,Whose thoughts in utmost stress of illWere fixed upon her husband still.The giant king approached the dame,Declared in tones of joy his name;Then heeding naught her wild distressBespake her, stern and pitiless:  "The prince to whom thy fancies clingThough loved and wooed by Lanká's king,Who slew the noble Khara,--heIs slain by warriors sent by me.Thy living root is hewn away.Thy scornful pride is tamed to-day.Thy lord in battle's front has died,And Sitá shall be Rávan's bride.Hence, idle thoughts: thy hope is fled;What wilt thou, Sitá, with the dead?Rise, child of Janak, rise and beThe queen of all my queens and me.Incline thine ear, and I will tell,Dear lady, how thy husband fell.He bridged his way across the seaWith countless troops to fight with me.The setting sun had flushed the westWhen on the shore they took their rest.Weary with toil no watch they kept,Securely on the sand they slept.

Prahasta's troops assailed our foes,
And smote them in their deep repose.Scarce could their bravest prove their might;They perished in the dark of night.Axe, spear, and sword, directed well,Upon the sleeping myriads fell.First in the fight Prahasta's swordReft of his head thy slumbering lord,Roused at the din Vibhíshan rose,The captive of surrounding foes,And Lakshman through the woods that spreadAround him with his Vánars fled.Hanumán fell: one deadly strokeThe neck of King Sugriva brokeAnd Maunta sank, and Dwivil layGasping in hand his life away.The Vánars died, or fled dispersed
Like cloudlets when the storm has burst.
Some rose aloft in air, and moreRan to the sea and filled the shore.On shore, in woods, on hill and plainOur conquering giants left the slain.Thus my victorious host o'erthrewThe Vanars, and thy husband slew:See, rudely stained with dust, and red With dropping blood, the severed head."   Then, turning to a Rákshas slave,The ruthless king his mandate gave;

And straight Vidyujjihva who bore
The head still wet with dripping gore,The arrows and the mighty bow,Bent down before his master low.  'Vidyujjihva,' cried Rávan, 'placeThe head before the lady's'face,And let her see with weeping eyesThat low in death her husband lies.'   Before the queen the giant laidThe beauteous head his art had made.And Ravan cried: 'Thine eyes will knowThese arrows and the mighty bow.With fame of this by Ráma strungThe earth and heaven and hell have rung.Prahasta brought it hither whenHis hand had slain thy prince of men.Now, widowed Queen, thy hopes resign:Forget thy husband and be mine.'
Footnotes
450:1 I omit the rest of this canto, which is mere 
repetition. Rávan gives in the same words his former 
answer that the Gods, Gandharvas and fiends combined shall not force him to give up Sitá. He then orders S'árdúla to tell him the names of the Vánar chieftains whom he has seen in Ráma's army. These have already 

been mentioned by S'uka and Sáran.
Next: Canto XXXII.: Sitá's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXII.: SITÁ'S LAMENT.
Again her eyes with tears o'erflowed.
She gazed upon the head he showed.Gazed on the bow so famed of yore,The glorious bow which Ráma bore.She gazed upon his cheek and brows,The eyes of her beloved spouse;His lips, the lustre of his hair,The priceless gem that glittered there.The features of her Lord she knew,And, pierced with anguish at the view,She lifted up her voice and cried:  "Kaikey, are thou satisfied?'Now all thy longings are fulfilled;The joy of Rughu's race is killed,And ruined is the ancient line,Destroyer, by that hand of thine.Ah, what offense, O cruel dame,What fault in Ráma couldst thou blame,To drive him clad in hermit dressWith Sitá to the wilderness?'  Great trembling seized her frame, and sheFell like a stricken plantain tree.As **** the ********* lays at lengthSlowly regaining sense and strength,

On the dear head she ******** her eye
p. 452
And cried with very bitter cry:
'Ah, when thy cold dead cheek I view,My hero, I am murdered too.Then first a faithful woman's eyesSee sorrow, when her husband dies.When thou, my lord, wast nigh to save,Some stealthy hand thy death wound gave.Thou art not dead: rise, hero, rise;Long life was thine, as spake the wiseWhose words, I ween, are ever true,For faith lies open to their view.Ah lord, and shall thy head reclineOn earth's cold breast, forsaking mine,Counting her chill lap dearer farThan I and my caresses are?Ah, is it thus these eyes beholdThy famous bow adorned with gold,Whereon of yore I loved to bindSweet garlands that my bands had twined?And hast thou sought in heaven a placeAmid the founders of thy race,Where in the home deserved so wellThy sires and Das'aratha dwell?Or dost thou shine a brighter starIn skies where blest immortals are,

Forsaking in thy lofty scorn
The race wherein thy sires were born?Turn to my gaze. O turn thine eye:Why are thy cold lips silent, why?When first we met as youth and maid.When in thy hand my hand was laid,Thy promise was thy steps should beThrough life in duty's path with me.Remember, faithful still, thy vow,And take me with thee even now.Is that broad bosom where I hung,That neck to which I fondly clung,Where flowery garlands breathed their scentBy hungry dogs and vultures rent?Shall no funereal honours graceThe parted lord of Raghu's race,Whose bounty liberal fees bestowed.For whom the fires of worship glowed?Kaus'alyá wild with grief will seeOne sole survivor of the threeWho in their hermit garments wentTo the dark woods in banishment.Then at her cry shall Lakshman tellHow, slain by night, the Vánars fell;How to thy side the giants crept,And slew the hero as he slept.Thy fate and mine the queen will know,And broken-hearted die of woe.For my unworthy sake, for mine,

Ráma, the glory of his line,
Who bridged his way across the main,Is basely in a puddle slain;And I, the graceless wife he wed,Have brought this ruin on his head.Me, too, on him, O Rávan, slay:
The wife beside her husband lay.
By his dear body let me rest,Cheek close to cheek and breast to breast,My happy eyes I then will close.And follow whither Ráma goes.'   Thus cried the miserable dame;When to the king a warder came,Before the giant monarch bowedAnd said that, followed by a crowdOf counsellors and lords of state,Prahasta stood before the gate,And, sent by some engrossing care,Craved audience of his master there.The anxious tyrant left his seatAnd hastened forth the chief to meet:Then summoning his nobles all,Took counsel in his regal hall.   When Lanká's lord had left the queen,The head and bow no more were seen.The giant king his nobles eyed,And, terrible as Yama, cried:'O faithful lords, the time is come:

Gather our hosts with beat of drum.
Nigh to the town our foeman draws:Be prudent, nor reveal the cause.'   The nobles listened and obeyed:Swift were the gathered troops arrayed,And countless rovers of the nightStood burning for the hour of tight.
Next: Canto XXXIII.: Saramá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIII.: SARAMÁ.
But Saramá, of gentler mood,
With pitying eyes the mourner viewed,Stole to her side and softly toldGlad tidings that her heart consoled.Revealing with sweet voice and smileThe secret of the giant's guile.She, one of those who night and dayWatching in turns by Sítá lay.Though Rákshas born felt pity's touch,And loved the hapless lady much.   'I heard,' she said, 'thy bitter cry,Heard Rávan's speech and thy reply,For, hiding in the thicket near,No word or tone escaped mine ear.When Rávan hastened forth I bentMy steps to follow as he went,And learnt the secret cause that droveThe monarch from the As'oka grove.Believe me, Queen, thou needst not weepFor Ráma slaughtered in his sleep.Thy lion lord of men defiesBy day attack, by night surprise.Can even giants slay with easeVast hosts who fight with brandished tree,

For whom, with eye that never sleeps,
His constant watch thy Ráma keeps?
p. 453
Lord of the mighty arm and chest,Of earthly warriors first and best,Whose fame through all the regions rings,Proud scion of a hundred kings;Who guards his life and loves to lendHis saving succour to a friend:Whose bow no hand but his can strain,--Thy lord, thy Ráma is not slain.Obedient to his master's will,A great magician, trained in ill.With deftest art surpassing thoughtThat marvellous illusion wrought.Let rising hope thy grief dispel:Look up and smile, for all is well.And gentle Lakshmí, Fortune's Queen,Regards thee with a favouring mien.Thy Ráma with his Vánar trainHas thrown a bridge athwart the main,Has led his countless legions o'er,And ranged them on this southern shore.These eyes have seen the hero standGirt by his hosts on Lanká's strand,And breathless spies each moment bringFresh tidings to the giant king;

And every peer and lord of state
Is called to counsel and debate.'
She ceased: the sound, long loud and clear,
Of gathering armies smote her ear,Where call of drum and shell rang out,The tambour and the battle shout;And, while the din the echoes woke,Again to Janak's child she spoke:'Hear, lady, hear the loud alarmsThat call the Rákshas troops to arms,From stable and from stall they leadThe elephant and neighing steed,Brace harness on with deftest care,And chariots for the fight prepare.Swift o'er the trembling ground careerMailed horsemen armed with axe and spear.And here and there in road and streetThe terrible battalions meet.I hear the gathering near and far,The snorting steed, the rattling car.Bold chieftains, leaders of the brave,Press densely on, like wave on wave,And bright the evening sunbeams glanceOn helm and shield, on sword and lance.Hark, lady, to the ringing steel,Hark to the rolling chariot wheel:Hark to the mettled courser's neighAnd drums' loud thunder far away.

The Queen of Fortune holds thee dear,
For Lanká's troops are struck with fear,And Ráma with the lotus eyes,Like Indra monarch of the skies,With conquering arm will slay his foeAnd free his lady from her woe.Soon will his breast support thy head,And tears of joy thine eyes will shed.Soon by his mighty arm embracedThe long-lost rapture wilt thou taste,And Ráma, meet for highest bliss,Will gain his guerdon in thy kiss.'
Next: Canto XXXIV.: Saramá's Tidings.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIV.: SARAMÁ'S TIDINGS.
Thus Saramá her story told:
And Sitá's spirit was consoled.As when the first fresh rain is shedThe parching earth is comforted.Then, filled with zeal for Sitá's sake,Again in gentle tones she spake,And, skilled in arts that soothe and please,Addressed the queen in words like these;'Thy husband, lady, will I seek,Say the fond words thy lips would apeak,And then, unseen of any eye,Back to thy side will swiftly fly.My airy flights are speedier farThan Garuda's and the tempest are.'
Then Sitá spake: her former woe
Still left her accents faint and low:'I know thy steps, which naught can stay,Can urge through heaven and hell their way.Then if thy love and changeless willWould serve the helpless captive still,Go forth and learn each plot and guilePlanned by the lord of Lanká's isle.With magic art like maddening wine

He cheats these weeping eyes of mine.
Torments me with his suit, nor sparesReproof or flattery, threats or prayers.These guards surround me night and day;My heart is sad, my senses stray;And helpless in my woe I fearThe tyrant Rávan even here.'
Then Saramá replied:'I go
To learn the purpose of thy foe,Soon by thy side again to standAnd tell thee what the king has planned.'She sped, she heard with eager earsThe tyrant speak his hopes and fears.Where, gathered at their master's call,The nobles filled the council hall;Then swiftly, to her promise true,Back to the As'oka grove she flew.The lady on the grassy ground,Longing for her return, she found;Who with a gentle smile, to greetThe envoy, led her to a seatThrough her worn frame a shiver ranAs Saramá her tale began:'There stood the royal mother: sheBesought her son to set thee free,
p. 454

And to her counsel, tears and prayers,
The elder nobles added theirs:'O be the Maithíl queen restoredWith honour to her angry lord.Let Janasthán's* unhappy fightBe witness of the hero's might.Hanuúmán o'er the waters cameAnd looked upon the guarded dame.Let Lanká's chiefs who fought and fellThe prowess of the leader tell.'In vain they sued, in vain she wept,His purpose still unchanged he kept.As clings the miser to his gold,He would not loose thee from his hold.No, never till in death he lies,Will Lanká's lord release his prize.Soon slain by Ráma's arrows allThe giants with their king will fall,And Ráma to his home will leadHis black-eyed queen from bondage freed.'
An awful sound that moment rose
From Lanká's fast-approaching foes,Where drum and shell in mingled pealMade earth in terror rock and reel.The hosts within the walls arrayedStood trembling, in their hearts dismayed;Thought of the tempest soon to burst,Aud Lanká's lord, their ruin, cursed.

Next: Canto XXXV.: Malyaván's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXV.: MALYAVÁN'S SPEECH.
The fearful notes of drum and shell
Upon the ear of Rávan fell.One moment quailed his haughty look,One moment in his fear he shook,But soon recalling wonted pride,His counsellors he sternly eyed,And with a voice that thundered throughThe council had* began anew:   'Lords, I have heard--your tongues have told--How Raghu's son is fierce and bold.To Lanká's shore has bridged his wayAnd hither leads his wild array.I know your might, in battle tried,Fighting and conquering by my side.Why now, when such a foe is near,Looks eye to eye in silent fear?
He ceased, his mother's sire well known
For wisdom in the council shown,Malyaván *, sage and faithful guide.Thus to the monarch's speech replied:   'Long reigns the king in safe repose.Unmoved by fear of vanquished foes,Whose feet* by saving knowledge led

In justice's* path delight to tread:
Who knows to sheath the sword or wield,To sue for peace*, to strike or yield:
Prefers, when foes are stronger, peace,
And bids a doubtful conflict cease.Now, King, the choice before thee lies,Make peace with Ráma, and be wise.This day the captive queen restoreWho brings the foe to Lanká's shore.The Sire by whom the worlds are swayedOf yore the Gods and demons made.With these Injustice sided; thoseFair Justice for her champions chose.Still Justice dwells with Gods above;Injustice, fiends and giants love.Thou, through the worlds that fear thee, longHast scorned the right and loved the wrong,And Justice, with thy foes allied,Gives might resistless to their side.Thou, guided by thy wicked will,Hast found delight in deeds of ill,And sages in their holy rest*Have trembled, by thy power oppressed.But they, who check each vain desire,Are clothed with might which burns like fire.In them the power and glory liveWhich zeal and saintly fervour give.Their constant task, their sole delight

Is worship and each holy rite,
To chant aloud the Veda hymn,Nor let the sacred fire grow dim.Now through the air like thunder ringThe echoes of the chants they sing.The vapours of their incense riseAnd, veil with cloudy pall the skies,And Rákshas might grows weak and faintKilled by the power of sage and saint.By Brahmá's boon thy life was screenedFrom God, Gandharva, Yaksha *, fiend;But Vánars, men and bears* arrayedAgainst thee now, thy shores invade.Red meteors, heralds of despairFlash* frequent through the humid* air,Foretelling to my troubled mindThe ruin of the Rákshas kindWith awful thundering overheadClouds black as night are densely spread,And oozing* from the gloomy pallGreat drops of blood on Lanká fallDogs roam through house and shrine to stealThe sacred oil * and curd and meal.Cats pair with tigers*, hounds with swine,And asses' foals are born of kine.In these and countless signs I traceThe ruin of the giant race,'Tis Vishnu's self who comes to stormThy city, clothed in Ráma's form;

For, well I ween, no mortal hand
The ocean with a bridge has spanned.O giant King, the dame release,And sue to Raghu's son for peace'
p. 455
Next: Canto XXXVI.: Rávan's Reply.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVI.: RÁVAN'S REPLY.
But Rávan's breast with fury swelled,
And thus he spake by Death impelled,While, under brows in anger bent,Fierce glances from his eyes were sent:'The bitter words which thou, misledBy friendly thought, hast fondly said,Which praise the foe and counsel fear,Unheeded fall upon mine ear.How canst thou deem a mighty foeThis Ráma who, in stress of woe,Seeks, banished as his sire decreed,Assistance from the Vánar breed?Am I so feeble in thine eyes,Though feared by dwellers of the skies,--Whose might in many a battle shownThe glorious race of giants own?Shall I for fear of him restoreThe lady whom I hither bore,Exceeding fair like Beauty's Queen  
1
Without her well-loved lotus seen?Around the chief let Lakshman stand,Sugríva, and each Vánar band,Soon, Malyaván, thine eyes will seeThis boasted Ráma slain by me.

I in the brunt of war defy
The mightiest warriors of the sky;And if I stoop to combat men,Shall I be weak and tremble then?This mangled trunk the foe may rend,But Rávan ne'er can yield or bend,And be it vice or virtue, IThis nature never will belie.What marvel if he bridged the sea?Why should this deed disquiet thee?This, only this, I surely know,Back with his life he shall not go.'
Thus in loud tones the king exclaimed,
And mute stood Malyaván ashamed,His reverend head he humbly bent,And slowly to his mansion went.But Rávan stayed, and deep in careHeld counsel with his nobles there,All entrance to secure and close,And guard the city from their foes.He bade the chief Prahasta waitCommander at the eastern gate.To fierce Mahodar, strong and brave,To keep the southern gate, he gave,Where Mahápárs'va's might should aidThe chieftain with his hosts arrayed.To guard the west--no chief more fit--He placed the warrior Indrajit,

His son, the giant's joy and boast,
Surrounded by a Rákshas host:And mighty Sáran hastened forthWith Suka to protect the north.  
1b
'I will myself,' the monarch cried,'Be present on the northern side.'These orders for the walls' defenceThe tyrant gave, then parted thence,And, by the hope of victory fired,To chambers far within, retired.
Footnotes
455:1 Lakshmi is the Goddess both of beauty and 
fortune, and is represented with a lotus in her hand.
Next: Canto XXXVII.: Preparations.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVII.: PREPARATIONS.
Lords of the legions of the wood,
The chieftains with Vibhíshan stood,And, strangers in the foeman's land,Their hopes and fears in council scanned:'See, see where Lanká's towers ascend,Which Rávan's power and might defend,Which Gods, Gandharvas, fiends would failTo conquer, if they durst assail.How shall our legions pass within,The city of the foe to win,With massive walls and portals barredWhich Rávan keeps with surest guard?'With anxious looks the walls they eyed:And sage Vibhíshan thus replied:'These lords of mine  
2b can answer: they
Within the walls have found their way,The foeman's plan and order learned,And hither to my side returned.Now, Ráma, let my tongue declareHow Rávan's hosts are stationed there.Prahasta heads, in warlike state,His legions at the eastern gate.To guard the southern portal standsMahodar, girt by Rákshas bands,

Where mighty Mahápárs'va, sent
By Rávan's hest, his aid has lent.Guard of the gate that fronts the westIs valiant Indrajit, the bestOf warriors, Rávan's joy and pride;And by the youthful chieftain's sideAre giants, armed for fierce attacksWith sword and mace and battle-axe.North, where approach is dreaded most,The king, encompassed with a hostOf giants trained in war, whose handsWield maces, swords and lances, stands.
p. 456
All these are chiefs whom Rávan choseAs mightiest to resist his foes;And each a countless army  
1 leads
With elephants and cars and steeds.'   Then Ráma, while his spirit burnedFor battle, words like these returned:'The eastern gate be Níla's care.Opponent of Prahasta there.The southern gate, with troops arrayedLet Angad, Báli's son, invade.The gate that fronts the falling sunShall be by brave Hanúmán won;Soon through its portals shall he leadHis myriads of Vánar breed.

The gate that fronts the north shall be
Assailed by Lakshman and by me.For I myself have sworn to killThe tyrant who delights in ill.Armed with the boon which Brahmá gave,The Gods of heaven he loves to brave.And through the trembling worlds he flies,Oppressor of the just and wise.Thou, Jámbaván, and thou, O KingOf Vánars, all your bravest bring,And with your hosts in dense arrayStraight to the centre force your way.But let no Vánar in the stormDisguise him in a human form.Ye chiefs who change your shapes at will,Retain your Vánar semblance still.Thus, when we battle with the foe,Both men and Vánars will ye know,In human form will seven appear;Myself, my brother Lakshman here;Vibhíshan, and the four he ledFrom Lanká's city when he fled.'
Thus Raghu's son the chiefs addressed:
Then, gazing on Suvela's crest,Transported by the lovely sight,He longed to climb the mountain height.

Footnotes
455:1b The poet appears to have forgotten that Suka 
and Sáran were dismissed with ignominy in Canto 
XXIX., and have not been reinstated.
455:2b The four who fled with him. Their names are 
Anala*, Panasa, Sampáti, and Pramati.
Next: Canto XXXVIII.: The Ascent of Suvela.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXVIII.: THE ASCENT OF 
SUVELA.
'Come let us scale,' the hero cried,
'This hill with various metals dyed.This night upon the breezy crestSugríva, Lakshman, I, will rest,With sage Vibhíshan, faithful friend,His counsel and his lore to lend.From these tall* peaks each eager eyeThe foeman's city shall espy,Who from the wood my darling stoleAnd brought long anguish on my soul.'
Thus spake the lord of men, and bent
His footsteps to the steep ascent,And Lakshman, true in weal and woe,Next followed with his shafts and bow.Vibhíshan followed, next in place,The sovereign of the Vánar race,And hundreds of the forest kindThronged with impetuous feet, behind.The chiefs in woods and mountains bredFast followed to Suvela's head,And gazed on Lanká bright and fair

As some gay city in the air.
On glittering gates, on ramparts raisedBy giant hands, the chieftains gazed.They saw the mighty hosts that, skilledIn arts of war, the city filled,And ramparts with new ramparts lined,The swarthy hosts that stood behind.With spirits burning for the fightThey saw the giants from the height,And from a hundred throats rang outDefiance and the battle shout.Then sank the sun with dying flame,And soft the shades of twilight came,And the full moon's delicious lightWas shed upon the tranquil night.
Footnotes
456:1 The numbers here are comparatively modern: ten 
thousand elephants, ten thousand chariots, twenty 
thousand horses and ten million giants.
Next: Canto XXXIX.: Lanká.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XXXIX.: LANKÁ.
They slept secure: the sun arose
And called the chieftains from repose.Before the wondering Vánars, gayWith grove and garden, Lanká lay,Where golden buds the Champak showed,And bright with bloom As'oka glowed,And palm and Sál and many a treeWith leaf and flower were fair to see.They looked on wood and lawn and glade,On emerald grass and dusky shade,Where creepers filled the air with scent.And luscious fruit the branches bent,Where bees inebriate loved to throng,And each sweet bird was loud in song.The wondering Vánars passed the boundThat circled that enchanting ground,And as they came a sweet breeze throughThe odorous alleys softly blew.Some Vánars, at their king's behest,Onward to bannered Lanká pressed,While, startled by the strangers' tread,The birds and deer before them fled.Earth trembled at each step they took,And Lanká at their shouting shook.

Bright rose before their wondering eyes
Trikata's * peak that kissed the skies,And, clothed with flowers of every hue,And its golden alin * thr *.More fair to see the * mountain's head
p. 457
A hundred leagues in length was spread.There Rávan's town, securely placed,The summit of Trikúta graced.O'er leagues of land she stretched in pride,A hundred long and twenty wide.They saw a lofty wall enfoldThe city, built of blocks of gold,They saw the beams of morning fallOn dome and fane within the wall,Bright with the shine that mansion givesWhere Vishnu in his glory lives.White-created like the Lord of SnowsBefore them Rávan's palace rose.High on a thousand pillars raisedWith gold and precious stone it blazed,Guarded by giant warders, crownAnd ornament of Lanká's town.
Next: Canto XL.: Rávan Attacked.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XL.: RÁVAN ATTACKED.
Still stood the son of Raghu where
Suvela's peak rose high in air,And with Sugríva turned his eyeTo scan each quarter of the sky.There on Trikúta, nobly plannedAnd built by Vis'vakarmá's hand,He saw the lovely Lanká, dressedIn all her varied beauty, rest.High on a tower above the gateThe tyrant stood in kingly state,The royal canopy displayedAbove him lent its grateful shade,And servants, from the giant band,His cheek with jewelled chowries fanned.Red sandal o'er his breast was spread,His ornaments and robe were red:Thus shows a cloud of darksome hueWith golden sunbeams flashing through.While Ráma and the chiefs intentUpon the king their glances bent,Up sprang Sugríva from the groundAnd reached the turret at a bound.Unterrified the Vánar stood,And wroth, with wondrous hardihood,

The king in bitter words addressed,
And thus his scorn and hate expressed:
'King of the giant race, in me
The friend and slave of Ráma see.Lord of the world, he gives me powerTo smite thee in thy fenced tower.'While through the air his challenge rang,At Rávan's face the Vánar sprang.Snatched from his head the kingly crownAnd dashed it in his fury down.Straight at his foe the giant flew,His mighty arms about him threw.With strength resistless swung him roundAnd dashed him panting to the ground,
Unharmed amid the storm of blows
Swift to his feet Sugríva rose.Again in furious fight they met:With streams of blood their limbs were wet,Each grasping his opponent's waist.Thus with their branches interlaced,Which, crimson with the flowers of spring,From side to side the breezes swing,In furious wrestle you may seeThe Kins'uk and the Seemal tree.  
1
They fought with fists and hands, alikePrepared to parry and to strike.Long time the doubtful combat, waged

With matchless strength and fury, raged.
Each fiercely struck, each guarded well,Till, closing, from the tower they fell,And, grasping each the other's throat,Lay for an instant in the moat,Then rose, and each in fiercer moodThe sanguinary strife renewed.Well matched in size and strength and skillThey fought the dubious battle still.While sweat and blood their limbs bedewedThey met, retreated, and pursued:Each stratagem and art they tried,Stood front to front and swerved aside.His hand a while the giant stayedAnd called his magic to his aid.But brave Sugríva, swift to knowThe guileful purpose of the foe,Gained with light leap the upper air.And breath and strength and spirit then;Then, joyous as for victory won,Returned to Raghu's royal son.
Next: Canto XLI.: Ráma's Envoy.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLI.: RÁMA'S ENVOY.
When Ráma saw each bloody trace
On King Sugríva's limbs and face,He cried, while, sorrowing at the view,His arms about his friend he threw:'Too venturous chieftain, kings like usBring not their lives in peril thus;Nor, save when counsel shows the need,Attempt so bold, so rash a deed.Remember. I, Vibhíshan allHave sorrowed fearing for thy fall.O do not--for us all I speak--These desperate adventures seek,'I could not,' cried Sugríva, 'brookUpon the giant king to look,
p. 458
Nor challenge to the deadly strifeThe fiend who robbed thee of thy wife.''Now Lakshman, marshal,' Ráma cried,'Our legions where the woods are wide,And stand we ready to opposeThe fury of our giant foes.This day our armies shall ascend

The walls which Rávan's powers defend,
And floods of Rákshas blood shall stainThe streets encumbered with the slain.'Down from the peak he came, and viewedThe Vánars' ordered multitude.Each captain there for battle burned,Each fiery eye to Lanká turned.On, where the royal brothers ledTo Lanká's walls the legions sped.The northern gate, where giant foesSwarmed round their monarch, Ráma choseWhere he in person might directThe battle, and his troops protect.What arm but his the post might keepWhere, strong as he who sways the deep,  
1
Mid thousands armed with bow and mace,Stood Rávan mightiest of his race?The eastern gate was Níla's post.Where marshalled stood his Vánar host,And Mainda with his troops arrayed,And Dwivid stood to lend him aid.The southern gate was Angad's care,Who ranged his bold battalions there.Hanúmán by the port that facedThe setting sun his legions placed,And King Sugríva held the woodEast of the gate where Rávan stood.On every side the myriads met,And Lanká's walls of close beset

That scarce the roving gale could win
A passage to the hosts within.Loud as the angry ocean's roarWhen wild waves lash the rocky shore,Ten thousand thousand throats upsentA shout that tore the firmament,And Lanká with each grove and brookAnd tower and wall and rampart shook.The giants heard, and were appalled:Then Raghu's son to Angad called,And, led by kingly duty,  
2 gave
This order merciful as brave:'Go, Angad, Rávan's presence seek,And thus my words of warning speak:'How art thou changed and fallen now,O Monarch of the giants, thouWhose impious fury would not spareSaint, nymph, or spirit of the air;Whose foot in haughty triumph trodOn Yaksha, king, and Serpent God:
How art thou fallen from thy pride
Which Brahmá's favour fortified!With myriads at thy Lanká's gateI stand my righteous ire to sate,And punish thee with sword and flame,The tyrant fiend who stole my dame.Now show the might, employ the guile,O Monarch of the giants' isle,

Which stole a helpless dame away:
Call up thy power and strength to-day.Once more I warn thee, Rákshas King,This hour the Maithil lady bring,And, yielding while there yet is time,Seek, suppliant, pardon for the crime,Or I will leave beneath the sunNo living Rákshas, no, not one.In vain from battle wilt thou fly,Or borne on pinions seek the sky;The hand of Ráma shall not spare;His fiery shaft shall smite thee there.'
He ceased: and Angad bowed his head;
Thence like embodied flame be sped,And lighted from his airy roadWithin the Rákshas king's abode.There sate, the centre of a ringOf counsellors, the giant king.Swift through the circle Angad pressed,And spoke with fury in his breast:'Sent by the lord of Kosal's land,His envoy here, O King, I stand,Angad the son of Báli: fameHas haply taught thine ears my name.Thus in the words of Ráma IAm come to warn thee or defy:Come forth, and fighting in the vanDisplay the spirit of a man.

This arm shall slay thee, tyrant: all
Thy nobles, kith and kin shall fall:And earth and heaven, from terror freed,Shall joy to see the oppressor bleed,Vibhíshan, when his foe is slain,Anointed king in peace shall reign.Once more I counsel thee: repent,Avoid the mortal punishment,With honour due the dame restore,And pardon for thy sin implore.'
Loud rose the king's infuriate cry:
'Seize, seize the Vánar, let him lie.'Four of his band their lord obeyed,And eager hands on Angad laid.He purposing his strength to showGave no resistance to the foe,But swiftly round his captors castHis mighty arms and held them fast.Fierce shout and cry around him rang:Light to the palace roof he sprang,There his detaining arms unwound.And hurled the giants to the ground,Then, smiting with a fearful stroke,A turret from the roof he broke,--As when the fiery levin sent
p. 459

By Indra from the clouds has rent
The proud peak of the Lord of Snow,-And flung the stony mass below.Again with loud terrific cryHe sprang exulting to the sky,And, joyous for his errand done,Stood by the side of Raghu's son.
Footnotes
457:1 The Rusuk * also called Palas'a, is Bruten 
Frondosa, a tree that bears beautiful red crescent shaped 
blossoms and is deservedly a favorite with poets. * ??????? Seekal the silk cotton * ????? bush also bears red blossoms.
458:1 Varuna.
458:2 The duty of a king to save the lives of his people 
and avoid bloodshed until milder methods have been 
tried in vain.
Next: Canto XLII.: The Sally.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLII.: THE SALLY.
Still was the cry,'The Vánar foes
Around the leaguered city close.'King Rávan from the terrace gazedAnd saw, with eyes where fury blazed,The Vánar host in serried ranksPress to the moat and line the banks,And, first in splendour and in place,The lion lord of Raghu's race.And Ráma looked on Lanká whereGay flags were streaming to the air,And, while keen sorrow pierced him through,His loving thoughts to Sitá flew:'There, there in deep affliction liesMy darling with the fawn-like eyes.There on the cold bare ground she keepsSad vigil and for Ráma weeps.'Mad with the thought, 'Charge, charge,' he cried.'Let earth with Rákshas blood be dyed.'  Responsive to his call rang outA loud, a universal shout,As myriads filled the moat with stone,Trees, rocks, and mountains overthrown,And charging at their leader's call

Pressed forward furious to the wall.
Some in their headlong ardour scaledThe rampart's height, the guard assailed,And many a ponderous fragment rentFrom portal, tower, and battlement.Huge gates adorned with burnished goldWere loosed and lifted from their hold;And post and pillar, with a soundLike thunder, fell upon the ground.At every portal, east and westAnd north and south, the chieftains pressedEach in his post appointed ledHis myriads in the forest bred.
'Charge, let the gates be opened wide:
'Charge, charge, my giants,' Rávan cried.They heard his voice, and loud and longRang the wild clamour of the throng,And shell and drum their notes upsent,And every martial instrument.Forth, at the bidding of their lordFrom every gate the giants poured,As, when the waters rise and swell.Huge waves preceding waves impel.
Again from every Vánar throat
A scream of fierce defiance smoteThe welkin: earth and sea and skyReëchoed with the awful cry.

The roar of elephants, the neigh
Of horses eager for the fray.The frequent clash of warriors' steel,The rattling of the chariot wheel.Fierce was the deadly fight: opposedIn terrible array they closed,As when the Gods of heaven enragedWith rebel fiends wild battle waged.Axe, spear, and mace were wielded well:At every blow a Vánar fell.But shivered rock and brandished treeBrought many a giant on his knee,To perish in his turn beneathThe deadly wounds of nails and teeth.
Next: Canto XLIII.: The Single Combats.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIII.: THE SINGLE COMBATS.
Brave chiefs of each opposing side
Their strength in single combat tried.Fierce Indrajit the fight beganWith Angad in the battle's van.Sampátí, strongest of his race,Stood with Prajangha face to face.Hanúmán, Jambumálí metIn mortal opposition set.Vibhíshan, brother of the lordOf Lanká, raised his threatening swordAnd singled out, with eyes aglowWith wrath, S'atrughna for his foe.The mighty Gaja Tapan sought,And Níla with Nikumbha fought.Sugríva, Vánar king, defiedFierce Praghas long in battle tried,And Lakshman fearless in the fightEncountered Virúpáksha's might.To meet the royal Ráma cameWild Agniketu fierce as flame;Mitraghana, he who loved to strikeHis foeman and his friend alike:With Ras'miketu, known and fearedWhere'er his ponderous flag was reared;

And Yajnakopa whose delight
Was ruin of the sacred rite.These met and fought, with thousands more,And trampled earth was red with goreSwift as the bolt which Indra sendsWhen fire from heaven the mountain rendsSmote Indrajit with furious blowsOn Angad queller of his foes.But Angad from his foeman toreThe murderous mace the warrior bore,
p. 460
And low in dust his coursers rolled,His driver, and his car of gold.Struck by the shafts Prajangha sped,The Vánar chief Sampáti bled,But, heedless of his gashes heCrushed down the giant with a tree.Then car-borne Jambumáli smoteHanumán on the chest and throat;But at the car the Vánar rushed,And chariot, steeds, and rider crushed.Sugríva whirled a huge tree round,And struck fierce Praghas to the ground.One arrow shot from Lakshman's bowLaid mighty Virúpáksha low.His giant foes round Ráma pressedAnd shot their shafts at head and breast;

But, when the iron shower was spent,
Four arrows from his bow he sent,And every missile, deftly sped;Cleft from the trunk a giant head.  
1
Next: Canto XLIV.: The Night.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIV.: THE NIGHT.
The lord of Light had sunk and set:
Night came; the foeman struggled yet;And fiercer for the gloom of nightGrew the wild fury of the fight.Scarce could each warrior's eager eyeThe foeman from the friend descry.'Rákshas or Vánar? say;' cried each,And foe knew foeman by his speech.'Why wilt thou fly? O warrior, stay:'Turn on the foe, and rend and slay:'Such were the cries, such words of fearSmote through the gloom each listening ear.Each swarthy rover of the nightWhose golden armour flashed with light,Showed like a towering hill embracedBy burning woods about his waist.The giants at the Vánars flew,And ravening ate the foes they slew:With mortal bite like serpent's fang,The Vánars at the giants sprang,And car and steeds and they who boreThe pennons fell bedewed with gore,No serried band, no firm arrayThe fury of their charge could stay

Down went the horse and rider, down
Went giant lords of high renown.Though midnight's shade was dense and dark,With skill that swerved not from the mark
Their bows the sons of Raghu drew,
And each keen shaft a chieftain slew.Uprose the blinding dust from meadsPloughed by the cars and trampling steeds,And where the warriors fell the floodWas dark and terrible with blood.Six giants  
1b singled Ráma out,
And charged him with a furious shoutLoud as the roaring of the seaWhen every wind is raging free.Six times he shot: six heads were cleft;Six giants dead on earth were left.Nor ceased he yet: his bow he strained,And from the sounding weapon rainedA storm of shafts whose fiery glareFilled all the region of the air;And chieftains dropped before his aimLike moths that perish in the flame.Earth glistened where the arrows fell,As shines in autumn nights a dellWhich fireflies, flashing through the gloom,With momentary light illume.
But Indrajit, when Báli's son  
2b

The victory o'er the foe had won.
Saw with a fury-kindled eyeHis mangled steeds and driver die;Then, lost in air, he fled the fight,And vanished from the victor's sight.The Gods and saints glad voices raised,And Angad for his virtue praised;And Raghu's sons bestowed the meedOf honour due to valorous deed.
Compelled his shattered car to quit,
Rage filled the soul of Indrajit,Who brooked not, strong by Brahmá's graceDefeat from one of Vánar race.In magic mist concealed from viewHis bow the treacherous warrior drew,And Raghu's sons were first to feelThe tempest of his winged steel.Then when his arrows failed to killThe princes who defied him still,He bound them with the serpent noose,  
3b
The magic bond which none might loose.
Footnotes
460:1 I have omitted several of these single combats, as 

there is little variety in the details and each duel results 
in the victory of the Vánar or his ally.
Next: Canto XLV.: Indrajit's Victory.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLV.: INDRAJIT'S VICTORY.
Brave Ráma, burning still to know
The station of his artful foe,
p. 461
Gave to ten chieftains, mid the bestOf all the host, his high behest.Swift rose in air the Vánar band:Each region of the sky they scanned:But Rávan's son by magic skillChecked them with arrows swifter still,When streams of blood from chest and sideThe dauntless Vánars' limbs had dyed.The giant in his misty shroudShowed like the sun obscured by cloud.Like serpents hissing through the air,His arrows smote the princely pair;And from their limbs at every rentA stream of rushing blood was sent.Like Kins'uk trees they stood, that showIn spring their blossoms' crimson glow.Then Indrajit with fury eyedIkshváku's royal sons, and cried:

'Not mighty Indra can assail
Or see me when I choose to veilMy form in battle: and can ye,Children of earth, contend with me?The arrowy noose this hand has shotHas bound you with a hopeless knot;And, slaughtered by my shafts and bow,To Yama's hall this hour ye go.'
He spoke, and shouted. Then anew
The arrows from his bowstring flew,And pierced, well aimed with perfect art,Each limb and joint and vital part.Transfixed with shafts in every limb.Their strength relaxed, their eyes grew dim.As two tall standards side by side,With each sustaining rope untied.Fall levelled by the howling blast,So earth's majestic lords at lastBeneath the arrowy tempest reeled,And prostrate pressed the battle field.
Footnotes
460:1b Yajnas'atru, Maháphráva, Mahodar, 
Vajradanshtra, S'uka, and Sáran.

460:2b Angad.
460:3b A mysterious weapon consisting of serpents 
transformed to arrows which deprived the wounded 
object of all sense and power of motion.
Next: Canto XLVI.: Indrajit's Triumph.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVI.: INDRAJIT'S TRIUMPH.
The Vánar chiefs whose piercing eyes
Scanned eagerly the earth and skies,Saw the brave brothers wounded soreTransfixed with darts and stained with gore.The monarch of the Vánar race,With wise Vibhíshan, reached the place;Angad and Níla came behind,And others of the forest kind,And standing with Hanúmán thereLamented for the fallen pair.Their melancholy eyes they raised;In fruitless search a while they gazed,But magic arts Vibhíshan knew;Not hidden from his keener view,Though veiled by magic from the rest,The son of Rávan stood confessed,Fierce Indrajit with savage prideThe fallen sons of Raghu eyed,And every giant heart was proudAs thus the warrior cried aloud:
'Slain by mine arrows Ráma lies,
And closed in death are Lakshman's eyes.Dead are the mighty princes who

Dúshan and Khara smote and slew.
The Gods and fiends may toil in vainTo free them from the binding chain.The haughty chief, my father's dread,Who drove him sleepless from his bed,While Lanká, troubled like a brookIn rain time, heard his name and shook:He whose fierce hate our lives pursuedLies helpless by my shafts subdued.Now fruitless is each wondrous deedWrought by the race the forests breed,And fruitless every toil at lastLike cloudlets when the rains are past.'Then rose the shout of giants loudAs thunder from a bursting cloud,When, deeming Ráma, dead, they raisedTheir voices and the conqueror praised.
Still motionless, as lie the slain,
The brothers pressed the bloody plain,No sigh they drew, no breath they heaved,And lay as though of life bereaved.Proud of the deed his art had done,To Lanká's town went Rávan's son,Where, as he passed, all fear was stilled,And every heart with triumph filled.Sugríva trembled as he viewedEach fallen prince with blood bedewed,And in his eyes which overflowed

With tears the flame of anger glowed.
'Calm,' cried Vibhíshan, 'calm thy fears,And stay the torrent of thy tears.Still must the chance of battle change,And victory still delight to range.Our cause again will she befriendAnd bring us triumph in the end.This is not death: each prince will breakThe spell that holds him, and awake;Nor long shall numbing magic bindThe mighty arm, the lofty mind.'
He ceased: his finger bathed in dew
Across Sugríva's eyes he drew;From dulling mist his vision freed.And spoke these words to suit the need:'No time is this for fear: awayWith fainting heart and weak delay.Now, e'en the tear which sorrow wringsFrom loving eyes destruction brings.Up, on to battle at the headOf those brave troops which Ráma led.Or guardian by his side remainTill sense and strength the prince regain.Soon shall the trance-bound pair revive,And from our hearts all sorrow drive.Though prostrate on the earth he lie,
p. 462

Deem not that Ráma's death is nigh;
Deem not that Lakshmí will forgetOr leave her darling champion yet.Rest here and be thy heart consoled;Ponder my words, be firm and bold.I, foremost in the battlefield,Will rally all who faint or yield.Their staring eyes betray their fear;They whisper each in other's ear.They, when they hear my cheering cryAnd see the friend of Ráma nigh,Will cast their gloom and fears awayLike faded wreaths of yesterday.'
Thus calmed he King Sugríva's dread;
Then gave new heart to those who fled.Fierce Indrajit, his soul on fireWith pride of conquest, sought his sire,Raised reverent hands, and told him all,The battle and the princes' fall.Rejoicing at his foes' defeatUpsprang the monarch from his seat,Girt by his giant courtiers: roundHis warrior son his arms he wound,Close kisses on his head applied,And heard again how Ráma died.

Next: Canto XLVII.: Sitá.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVII.: SITÁ.
Still on the ground where Ráma slept
Their faithful watch the Vánars kept.There Angad stood o'erwhelmed with griefAnd many a lord and warrior chief;And, ranged in densest mass around,Their tree-armed legions held the ground.Far ranged each Vánar's eager eye,Now swept the land, now sought the sky,All fearing, if a leaf was stirred,A Rákshas in the sound they heard.The lord of Lanká in his hall,Rejoicing at his foeman's fall,Commanded and the warders cameWho ever watched the Maithil dame.'Go,' cried the Rákshas king, 'relateTo Janak's child her husband's fate.Low on the earth her Ráma lies,And dark in death are Lakshman's eyes.Bring forth my car and let her rideTo view the chieftains side by side.The lord to whom her fancy turnedFor whose dear sake my love she spurned,Lies smitten, as he fiercely ledThe battle, with his brother dead.

Lead forth the royal lady: go
Her husband's lifeless body show.Then from all doubt and terror freeHer softening heart will turn to me.'They heard his speech: the car was brought;
That shady grove the warders sought
Where, mourning Ráma night and day,The melancholy lady lay.They placed her in the car and throughThe yielding air they swiftly flew.The lady looked upon the plain,Looked on the heaps of Vánar slain,Saw where, triumphant in the fight,Thronged the fierce rovers of the night,And Vánar chieftains, mournful-eyed,Watched by the fallen brothers' side.There stretched upon his gory bedEach brother lay as lie the dead,With shattered mail and splintered bowPierced by the arrows of the foe.When on the pair her eyes she bent,Burst from her lips a wild lamentHer eyes o'erflowed, she groaned and sighedAnd thus in trembling accents cried:
Next: Canto XLVIII.: Sitá's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLVIII.: SITÁ'S LAMENT.
'False are they all, proved false to-day,
The prophets of my fortune, theyWho in the tranquil time of oldA blessed life for me foretold,Predicting I should never knowA childless dame's, a widow's woe,False are they all, their words are vain.For thou, my lord and life, art slain.False was the priest and vain his loreWho blessed me in those days of yoreBy Ráma's side in bliss to reign:For thou, my lord and life, art slain.They hailed me happy from my birth,Proud empress of the lord of earth.They blessed me--but the thought is pain--For thou, my lord and life, art slain.Ah, fruitless hope! each glorious signThat stamps the future queen is mine,With no ill-omened mark to showA widow's crushing hour of woe.They say my hair is black and fine,They praise my brows' continuous line;My even teeth divided well.My bosom for its graceful swell.

They praise my feet and fingers oft;
They say my skin is smooth and soft,And call me happy to possessThe twelve fair marks that bring success.  
1
But ah, what profit shall I gain?Thou, O my lord and life, art slain.The flattering seer in former daysMy gentle girlish smile would praise,
p. 463
And swear that holy water shedBy Bráhman hands upon my headShould make me queen, a monarch's bride:How is the promise verified?Matchless in might the brothers slewIn Janasthán the giant crew,And forced the indomitable seaTo let them pass to rescue me.Theirs was the fiery weapon hurledBy him who rules the watery world;  
1
Theirs the dire shaft by Indra sped;Theirs was the mystic Brahmá's Head.  
2
In vain they fought, the bold and brave:A coward's hand their death-wounds gave.By secret shafts and magic spellThe brothers, peers of Indra, fell.That foe, if seen by Ráma's eyeOne moment, had not lived to fly.

Though swift as thought, his utmost speed
Had failed him in the hour of need.No might, no tear, no prayer may stayFate's dark inevitable day.Nor could their matchless valour shieldThese heroes on the battle field.I sorrow for the noble dead,I mourn my hopes for ever fled;But chief my weeping eyes o'erflowFor Queen Kaus'alyá's hopeless woe.The widowed queen is counting nowEach hour prescribed by Ráma's vow,And lives because she longs to seeOnce more her princely sons and me.'
Then Trijatá,  
3 of gentler mould
Though Rákshas born, her grief consoled:
'Dear Queen, thy causeless woe dispel:Thy husband lives, and all is well.Look round: in every Vánar faceThe light of joyful hope I trace.Not thus, believe me, shine the eyesOf warriors when their leader dies.An Army, when the chief is dead,Flies from the field dispirited.Here, undisturbed in firm array,The Vánars by the brothers stay.Love prompts my speech; no longer grieve;Ponder my counsel, and believe.

These lips of mine from earliest youth
Have spoken, and shall speak, the truth.Deep in my heart thy gentle graceAnd patient virtues hold their place.Turn, lady, turn once more thine eye:Though pierced with shafts the heroes lie,
On brows and cheeks with blood-drops wet
The light of beauty lingers yet.Such beauty ne'er is found in death,But vanishes with parting breath.O, trust the hope these tokens give:The heroes are not dead, but live.'
Then Sítá joined her hands, and sighed,
'O, may thy words be verified!'The car was turned, which fleet as thoughtThe mourning queen to Lanká brought.They led her to the garden, whereAgain she yielded to despair,Lamenting for the chiefs who bledOn earth's cold bosom with the dead.
Footnotes
462:1 On each foot, and at the root of each finge.

463:1 Varun.
463:2 The name of one of the mystical weapons the 
command over which was given by Vis'vámitra to 
Ráma, as related in Book I.
463:3 One of Sítá's guard, and her comforter on a 
former occasion also.
Next: Canto XLIX.: Ráma's Lament

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XLIX.: RÁMA'S LAMENT
Ranged round the spot where Ráma fell
Each Vánar chief stood sentinel.At length the mighty hero brokeThe trance that held him, and awoke.He saw his senseless brother, dyedWith blood from head to foot, and cried:'What have I now to do with lifeOr rescue of my prisoned wife,When thus before my weeping eyes,Slain in the fight, my brother lies?A queen like Sítá I may findAmong the best of womankind,But never such a brother, triedIn war, my guardian, friend, and guide.If he be dead, the brave and true,I will not live but perish too.How, reft of Lakshman, shall I meetMy mother, and Kaikeyí greet?Mv brother's eager question brook,And fond Sumitrá's longing look?What shall I say, o'erwhelmed with shameTo cheer the miserable dame?How, when she hears her son is dead,Will her sad heart be comforted?

Ah me, for longer life unfit
This mortal body will I quit;For Lakshman slaughtered for my sake,From sleep of death will never wake.Ah when I sank oppressed with care,Thy gentle voice could soothe despair.And art thou, O my brother, killed?Is that dear voice for ever stilled?Cold are those lips, my brother, whenceCame never word to breed offence?Ah stretched upon the gory plainMy brother lies untimely slain;Numbed is the mighty arm that slewThe leaders of the giant crew.Transfixed with shafts, with blood-streams red.Thou liest on thy lowly bed:
p. 464
So sinks to rest, his journey done,Mid arrowy rays the crimson sun.Thou, when from home and sire I fled,The wood's wild ways with me wouldst tread:Now close to thine my steps shall be,For I in death will follow thee.Vibhíshan now will curse my name,And Ráma as a braggart blame.Who promised--but his word is vain--That he in Lanká's isle should reign.

Return, Sugríva: reft of me
Lead back thy Vánars o'er the sea,Nor hope to battle face to faceWith him who rules the giant race.Well have ye done and nobly fought,And death in desperate combat sought.All that heroic might can do,Brave Vánars, has been done by you.My faithful friends I now dismiss:Return: my last farewell is this.'
Bedewed with tears was every cheek
As thus the Vánars heard him speak.Vibhíshan on the field had stayedThe Vánar hosts who fled dismayed.Now lifting up his mace on highWith martial step the chief drew nigh.The hosts who watched by Ráma's sideBeheld his shape and giant stride.'Tis he,'tis Rávan's son, they thought:And all in flight their safety sought.
Next: Canto L.: The Broken Spell.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO L.: THE BROKEN SPELL.
Sugríva viewed the flying crowd,
And thus to Angad cried aloud:'Why run the trembling hosts, as fleeStorm-scattered barks across the sea?''Dost thou not mark,' the chief replied,Transfixed with shafts, with bloodstreams dyed,With arrowy toils about them wound,The sons of Raghu on the ground?'
That moment brought Viohishan* near.
Sugríva knew the cause of fear,And ordered Jámbavan, who ledThe bears, to check the hosts that fled.The king of bears his hest obeyed:The Vanars' headlong flight was stayedA little while Vibhishan eyedThe brothers fallen side by side.His giant fingers wet with dewAcross the heroes' eyes he drew,Still on the pair his sad look bent,And spoke these word in wild lament:'Ah for the mighty chiefs brought lowBy coward hand and stealthy blow!Brave pair who loved the open fight,

Slain by that rover of the night.
Dishonest is the victory wonBy Indrajit my brother's son.I on their might for aid relied,And in my cause they fought and died.Lost is the hope that soothed each pain:I live, but live no more to reign,While Lanká's lord, untouched by ill,Exults in safe defiance still.'
'Not thus,' Sugríva said, 'repine,
For Lanká's isle shall still be thine.Nor let the tyrant and his sonExult before the fight be done,These royal chiefs, though now dismayed,Freed from the spell by Garud'a aid,Triumphant yet the foe shall meetAnd lay the robber at their feet.'
His hope the Vánar monarch told,
And thus Vibhíshan's grief consoled.Then to Sushen who at his sideExpectant stood, Sugríva cried:'When these regain their strength and sense,Fly, bear them to Kishkindhá hence.Here with my legions will I stay,The tyrant and his kinsmen slay,And rescued from the giant king.

The Maithil lady will I bring,
Like Glory lost of old, restoredBy S'akra, heaven's almighty lord.'  Sushen made answer: 'Hear me yet:When Gods and fiends in battle met,So fiercely fought the demon crew,So wild a storm of arrows flew,That heavenly warriors faint with pain,Sank smitten by the ceaseless rain.Vrihaspati,  
1 with herb and spell,
Cured the sore wounds of those who fell.And, skilled in arts that heal and save,New life and sense and vigour gave.Far, on the Milky Ocean's shore,Still grow those herbs in boundless store;Let swiftest Vánars thither speedAnd bring them for our utmost need.Those herbs that on the mountain springLet Panas and Sampáti bring,For well the wondrous leaves they know.That heal each wound and life bestow.Beside that sea which, churned of yore,The amrit on its surface bore,Where the white billows lash the land,Chandra's fair height and Drona stand.Planted by Gods each glittering steepLooks down upon the milky deep.Let fleet Hanúmán bring us thence

Those herbs of wondrous influence.'
Meanwhile the rushing wind grew loud,
Red lightnings flashed from banks of cloud.The mountains shook, the wild waves rose,And smitten with resistless blows
p. 465
Unrooted fell each stately treeThat fringed the margin of the sea.All life within the waters fearedThen, as the Vánars gazed, appearedKing Garud's self, a wondrous sight,Disclosed in flames of fiery light.From his fierce eye in sudden dreadAll serpents in a moment fled.And those transformed to shaft that boundThe princes vanished in the ground.On Raghu's sons his eyes he bent,And hailed the lords armipotent.Then o'er them stooped the feathered king,And touched their faces with his wing.His healing touch their pangs allayed,And closed each rent the shafts had made.Again their eyes were bright and bold,Again the smooth skin shone like gold.Again within their shell enshrinedCame memory and each power of mind:

And, from those numbing bonds released,
Their spirit, zeal, and strength increased.Firm on their feet they stood, and thenThus Ráma spake, the lord of men:   'By thy dear grace in sorest needFrom deadly bonds we both are freed.To these glad eyes as welcome nowAs Aja  
1 or my sire art thou.
Who art thou, mighty being? say,Thus glorious in thy bright array.'He ceased: the king of birds replied,While flashed his eye with joy and pride:'In me, O Raghu's son, beholdOne who has loved thee from of old:Garud, the lord of all that fly,Thy guardian and thy friend am I.Not all the Gods in heaven could looseThese numbing bonds, this serpent noose,Wherewith fierce Rávan's son, renownedFor magic arts, your limbs had bound.Those arrows fixed in every limbWere mighty snakes, transformed by him.Blood thirsty race, they live beneathThe earth, and slay with venomed teeth.On, smite the lord of Lanká's isle,But guard you from the giants' guileWho each dishonest art employAnd by deceit brave foes destroy.So shall the tyrant Rávan bleed,

And Sítá from his power be freed.'
Thus Garud spake: then, swift as thought,The region of the sky he sought,Where in the distance like a blazeOf fire he vanished from the gaze.   Then the glad Vánars joy rang outIn many a wild tumultuous shout,And the loud roar of drum and shellStartled each distant sentinel.
Footnotes
464:1 The preceptor of the Gods.
465:1 Ráma's grandfather.
Next: Canto LI.: Dhúmráksha's Sally.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LI.: DHÚMRÁKSHA'S SALLY.
King Rávan, where he sat within,
Heard from his hall the deafening din,And with a spirit ill at easeAddressed his lords in words like these:   'That warlike shout, those joyous cries,Loud as the thunder of the skies,Upsent from every Vánar throat,Some new-born confidence denote.Hark, how the sea and trembling shoreRe-echo with the Vánars' roar.Though arrowy chains, securely twinedBoth Ráma and his brother bind,Still must the fierce triumphant shoutDisturb my soul with rising doubt.Swift envoys to the army send,And learn what change these cries portend,'   Obedient, at their master's call.Fleet giants clomb the circling wall.They saw the Vánars formed and led:They saw Sugríva at their head,The brothers from their bonds released:And hope grew faint and fear increased.Their faces pale with doubt and dread,Back to the giant king they sped,

And to his startled ear revealed
The tidings of the battle field.   The flush of rage a while gave placeTo chilling fear that changed his face:   'What? cried the tyrant, 'are my foesFreed from the binding snakes that closeWith venomed clasp round head and limb,Bright as the sun and fierce like him:The spell a God bestowed of yore,The spell that never failed before?If arts like these be useless, howShall giant strength avail us nowGo forth, Dhúmráksha, good at need,The bravest of my warriors lead:Force through the foe thy conquering way,And Ráma and the Vánars slay'   Before his king with reverence dueDhúmráksha bowed him, and withdrew.Around him at his summons cameFierce legions led by chiefs of fame.Well armed with sword and spear and mace,They hurried to the gathering place,And rushed to battle, borne at speedBy elephant and car and steed.
Next: Canto LII.: Dhúmráksha's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LII.: DHÚMRÁKSHA'S DEATH.
The Vánars saw the giant foe
Pour from the gate in gallant show,
p. 466
Rejoiced with warriors' fierce delightAnd shouted, longing for the fight.Near came the hosts and nearer yet:Dire was the tumult as they met,As, serried line to line opposed,The Vánars and the giants closed.Fierce on the foe the Vánars rushed,And, wielding trees, the foremost crushed;But, feathered from the heron's wing,With eager flight from sounding string.Against them shot with surest aimA ceaseless storm of arrows came:And, pierced in head and chest and side,Full many a Vánar fell and died.They perished slain in fierce attacksWith sword and pike and battle-axe;But myriads following undismayedTheir valour in the fight displayed.Unnumbered Vánars rent and torn

With shaft and spear to earth were borne.
But crashed by branchy trees and blocksOf jagged stone and shivered rocksWhich the wild Vánars wielded wellThe bravest of the giants fell.Their trampled banners strewed the fields,And broken swords and spears and shields;And, crushed by blows which none might stay,Cars, elephants, and riders lay.Dhúmráksha turned his furious eyeAnd saw his routed legions fly.Still dauntless, with terrific blows,He struck and slew his foremost foes.At every blow, at every thrust,He laid a Vánar in the dust.So fell they neath the sword and lanceIn battle's wild Gandharva  
1 dance,
Where clang of bow and clash of swordDid duty for the silvery chord,And hoofs that rang and steeds that neighedLoud concert for the dancer made.So fiercely from Dhúmráksha's bowHis arrows rained in ceaseless flow,The Vánar legions turned and fledTo all the winds discomfited.Hanúmán saw the Vánars fly:He heaved a mighty rock on high.His keen eyes flashed with wrathful fire,And, rapid as the Wind his sire,

Strong as the rushing tempests are,
He hurled it at the advancing car.Swift through the air the missile sang:The giant from the chariot sprang,Ere crushed by that terrific blowLay pole and wheel and flag and bow.Hanúmán's eyes with fury blazed:A mountain's rocky peak he raised,
Poised it on high in act to throw,
And rushed upon his giant foe.Dhúmráksha saw: he raised his maceAnd smote Hanúmán on the face,Who maddened by the wound's keen pangAgain upon his foeman sprang;And on the giant's head the rockDescended with resistless shock.Crushed was each limb: a shapeless massHe lay upon the blood-stained grass.
Footnotes
466:1 The Gandharvas are warriors and Minstrels of 
Indra's heaven.

Next: Canto LIII.: Vajradanshtra's Sally.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIII.: VAJRADANSHTRA'S 
SALLY.
When Rávan in his palace heard
The mournful news, his wrath was stirred;And, gasping like a furious snake,To Vajradanshtra thus he spake:
'Go forth, my fiercest captain, lead
The bravest of the giants' breed.Go forth, the sons of Raghu slayAnd by their side Sugríva lay.'
He ceased: the chieftain bowed his head
And forth with gathered troops he sped.Cars, camels, steeds were well arrayed,And coloured banners o'er them played.Rings decked his arms: about his waistThe life-protecting mail was braced,And on the chieftain's forehead setGlittered his cap and coronet.Home on a bannered car that glowedWith golden sheen the warrior rode.And footmen marched with spear and swordAnd bow and mace behind their lord.

In pomp and pride of warlike state
They sallied from the southern gate,But saw, as on their way they sped,Dread signs around and overhead.For there were meteors falling fast,Though not a cloud its shadow cast;And each ill-omened bird and beast,Forboding death, the fear increased,While many a giant slipped and reeled,Falling before he reached the field.They met in mortal strife engaged,And long and fierce the battle raged.Spears, swords uplifted, gleamed and flashed,And many a chief to earth was dashed.A ceaseless storm of arrows rained,And limbs were pierced and blood-distained.Terrific was the sound that filledThe air, and every heart was chilled,As hurtling o'er the giants flewThe rocks and trees which Vánars threw.Fierce as a hungry lion whenUnwary deer approach his den,
p. 467
Angad, his eyes with fury red,Waving a tree above his head.Rushed with wild charge which none could stayWhere stood the giants' dense array.

Like tall trees levelled by the blast
Before him fell the giants fast,And earth that streamed with blood was strownWith warriors, steeds, and cars o'erthrown.
Next: Canto LIV.: Vajradanshtra's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIV.: VAJRADANSHTRA'S 
DEATH.
The giant leader fiercely rained
His arrows and thee fight maintained.Etime the clanging cord he drewHis certain shaft a Vánar slew.Then, as the creatures he has madeFly to the Lord of Life for aid,To Angad for protection fledThe Vánar hosts dispirited.Then raged the battle fiercer yetThen Angad and the giant met.A hundred thousand arrows, hotWith flames of fire the giant shot;And every shaft he deftly sentHis foeman's body pierced and rent.From Angad's limbs ran floods of gore:A stately tree from earth he tore,Which, maddened as his gashes bled,He hurled at his opponent's head.His bow the dauntless giant drew;To meet the tree swift arrows flew,Checked the huge missile's onward way,And harmless on the earth it lay.

A while the Vánar chieftain gazed,
Then from the earth a rock he raisedRent from a thunder-splitten height,And cast it with resistless might.The giant marked, and, mace in hand,Leapt from his chariot to the sand,Ere the rough mass descending brokeThe seat, the wheel, the pole and yoke.
Then Angad seized a shattered hill,
Whereon the trees were flowering still,And with full force the jagged peakFell crashing on the giant's cheek.He staggered, reeled, and fell: the bloodGushed from the giant in a flood.Reft of his might, each sense astray,A while upon the sand he lay.But strength and wandering sense returnedAgain his eyes with fury burned,And with his mace upraised on highHe wounded Angad on the thigh.Then from his hand his mace he threw,And closer to his foeman drew.
Then with their fists they fought, and smote
On brow and cheek and chest and throat.Worn out with toil, their limbs bedewed,With blood, the strife they still renewed,Like Mercury and fiery Mars

Met in fierce battle mid the stars.
A while the deadly fight was stayed:
Each armed him with his trusty bladeWhose sheath with tinkling bells supplied,And golden net, adorned his side;And grasped his ponderous leather shieldTo fight till one should fall or yield.Uunumbered wounds they gave and took:Their wearied bodies reeled and shook.At length upon the sand that drankStreams of their blood the warriors sank,But as a serpent rears his headSore wounded by a peasant's tread,So Angad, fallen on his knees,Yet gathered strength his sword to seize;And, severed by the glittering blade,The giant's head on earth was laid. 
1
p. 468
Footnotes
467:1 I omit Cantos LV., LVI., LVII., and LVIII. which 
relate how Akampan and Prahasta sally out and fall. 
There is little novelty of incident in these Cantos and 

the result are exactly the same as before. In Canto LV. 
Akampan, at the command of Rávan, leads forth his troops. Evil omens are seen and heard. The enemies meet, and many fall on each side, the Vánars transfixed with arrows, the Rákshases crushed with rooks and trees. 
In Canto LVI. Akampan sees that the Rákshases are 
worsted, and fights with redoubled rage and vigour. The Vánars fall fast under his "nets of arrows." Hanumán comes to the rescue. He throws mountain peaks at the giant which are dexterously stopped with flights of arrows; and at last beats him down and kills him with a tree. 
In Canto LVII. Rávan is seriously alarmed. He declares 
that he himself, Kumbhakarna or Prahasta, must go forth. Prahasta sallies out vaunting that the fowls of the air shall eat their fill of Vánar flesh. 
In Canto LVIII. the two armies meet. Dire is the 
conflict; ceaseless is the rain of stones and arrows. At last Níla meets Prahasta and breaks his bow. Prahasta leaps from his car, and the giant and the Vánar fight on foot. Níla with a huge tree crushes his opponent who falls like a tree when its roots are cut.
Next: Canto LIX.: Rávans Sally.



Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LIX.: RÁVANS SALLY.
They told him that the chief was killed,
And Rávan's breast with rage was filled.Then, fiercely moved by wrath and pride,Thus to his lords the tyrant cried:
'No longer, nobles, may we show
This lofty scorn for such a foeBy whom our bravest, with his trainOf steeds and elephants, is slain.Myself this day will take the field,And Raghu's sons their lives shall yield.'
High on the royal car, that glowed
With glory from his face, he rode;And tambour shell and drum pealed out,And joyful was each giant's shout.A mighty host, with eyeballs redLike flames of kindled fire, he led.He passed the city gate, and viewed,Arrayed, the Vánar multitude,Those wielding massy rocks, and theseArmed with the stems of uptorn trees,And Ráma with his eyes aglow

With warlike ardour viewed the foe,
And thus the brave Vibhíshan, bestOf weapon-wielding chiefs, addressed:'What captnin leads this bright arrayWhere lances gleam and banners play,And thousands armed with spear and swordAwait the bidding of their lord?'
'Seest, thou,' Vibhíshan answered, 'one
Whose face is as the morning sun,Preëminent for hugest frame?Akampan  
1 is the giant's name
Behold that chieftain, chariot-borne,Whom Brahmá's chosen gifts adorn.He wields a bow like Indra's own;A lion on his flag is shown,His eyes with baleful fire are lit:'Tis Rávan's son,'tis IndrajitThere, brandishing in mighty handsHis huge bow, Atikáya stands.And that proud warrior o'er whose headA moon-bright canopy is spread:Whose might, in many a battle tried,Has tamed imperial Indra's pride;Who wears a crown of burnished gold,Is Lanká's lord the lofty-souled.'
He ceased: and Ráma knew his foe,
And laid an arrow on his bow:

'Woe to the wretch,' he ciied, 'whom fate
Abandons to my deadly hate.'He spoke, and, firm by Lakshman's side,The giant to the fray defied.
The lord of Lanká bade his train
Of warriors by the gates remain,To guard the city from surpriseBy Ráma's forest born allies.Then as some monster of the seaCleaves swift-advancimg billows, heCharged with impetuous onset throughThe foe, and cleft the host in two.Sugríva ran, the king to meet:A hill uprooted from its seatHe hurled,with trees that graced the heightAgainst the rover of the night:But cleft with shafts that checked its wayHarmless upon the earth it lay.Then fiercer Rávan's fury grew,An arrow from his side he drew,Swift as a thunderbolt, aglowWith fire, and launched it at the foe.Through flesh and bone a way it found,And stretched Sugríva on the ground.Sushen and Nala saw him fall,Gaváksha, Gavaya heard their call,And, poising hills, in act * to flingThey charged amain the giant king.

They charged, they hurled the hills in vain.
He checked them with his arrowy rain,And every brave assailant feltThe piercing wounds his missiles dealt,Then smitten by the shafts that cameKeen, fleet, and thick, with certain aim,They fled to Ráma, sure defenceAgainst the oppressor's violence,Then, reverent palm to palm applied,Thus Lakshman to his brother cried:'To me, my lord, the task entrustTo lay this giant in the dust.''Go, then,' said Ráma, 'bravely fight;Beat down this rover of the night.But he, unmatched in bold emprise.Fears not the Lord of earth and skies,Keep on thy guard: with keenest eyeThy moments of attack espy.Let hand and eye in due accordProtect thee with the bow and sword.'
Then Lakshman round his brother threw
His mighty arms in honour due,Bent lowly down his reverent head,And onward to the battle sped.Hanúmán from afar beheldHow Rávan's shafts the Vánars quelled:To meet the giant's car he ran,Raised his right arm and thus began:

'If Brahmá's boon thy life has screened
From Yaksha, God, Gandharva, fiend.With these contending fear no ill,But tremble at a Vánar still.'With fury flashing from his eyeThe lord of Lanká made reply.'Strike, Vánar, strike, the fray begin,Aml hope eternal fame to winThis arm shall pr * thee in the * ??
p. 469
And end thy glory and thy life.''Remember,' cried the Wind-God's son,'Remember all that I have done,My prowess, King, thou knowest well,Shown in the fight when Aksha  
1 fell.'
   With heavy hand the giant smoteHanúmán on the chest and throat,Who reeled and staggered to and fro,Stunned for a moment by the blow.Till, mustering strength, his hand he rearedAnd struck the foe whom Indra feared.His huge limbs bent beneath the shock,As mountains, in an earthquake, rock,And from the Gods and sages pealedShouts of loud triumph as he reeled.But strength returning nerved his frame:His eyeballs flashed with fiercer flame.

No living creature might resist
That blow of his tremendous fistWhich fell upon Hanúmán's flank:And to the ground the Vánar sank,No sign of life his body showed:And Rávan in his chariot rodeAt Níla; and his arrowy rainEell on the captain and his train.Fierce Níla stayed his Vánar band,And, heaving with his single handA mountain peak with vigorous swingHurled the huge missile at the king.   Hanúmán life and strength regained,Burned for the fight and thus complained:'Why, coward giant, didst thou fleeAnd leave the doubtful fight with me?'Seven mighty arrows keen and fleetThe giant launched, the hill to meet;And, all its force and fury stayed,The harmless mass on earth was laid.Enraged the Vánar chief beheldThe mountain peak by force repelled,And rained upon the foe a showerOf trees uptorn with branch and flower.Still his keen shafts which pierced and rentEach flying tree the giant sent:Still was the Vánar doomed to feelThe tempest of the winged steel.Then, smarting from that arrowy storm,

The Vánar chief condensed his form,  2
And lightly leaping from the ground
On Rávan's standard footing found;Then springing unimpeded downStood on his bow and golden crown.The Vánar's nimble leaps amazedIkshváku's son who stood and gazed.The giant, raging in his heart,
Laid on his bow a fiery dart;
The Vánar on his flagstaff eyed,And thus in tones of fury cried:'Well skilled in magic lore art thou:But will thine art avail thee now?See if thy magic will defendThy life against the dart I send.'   Thus Rávan spake, the giant king,And loosed the arrow from the string.It pierced, with direst fury sped,The Vánar with its flaming head.His father's might, his power innatePreserved him from the threatened fate.Upon his knees he fell, distainedWith streams of blood, but life remained,   Still Rávan for the battle burned:At Lakshman next his car he turned,And charged amain with furious show,Straining in mighty hands his bow.'Come,' Lakshman cried, 'assay the fight:

Leave foes unworthy of thy might.'
Thus Lakshman spoke: and Lanká's lordHeard the dread thunder of the cord,And mad with burning rage and prideIn hasty words like these replied:'Joy, joy is mine, O Raghu's son:Thy fate to-day thou canst not shun.Slain by mine arrows thou shalt treadThe gloomy pathway of the dead.'   Thus as, he spoke his bow he drew,And seven keen shafts at Lakshman flew,But Raghu's son with surest aimCleft every arrow as it came.Thus with fleet shafts each warrior shotAgainst his foe, and rested not.Then one choice weapon from his store,By Brahmá's self bestowed of yore,Fierce as the flames that end the world,The giant king at Lakshman hurled.The hero fell, and racked with pain,Scarce could his hand his bow retain.But sense and strength resumed their seatAnd, lightly springing to his feet,He struck with one Tremendons strokeAnd Rávan's bow in splinters broke.From Lakshmans's cord three arrows flewAnd pierced the giant monarch through.Sore wounded Rávan closed, and roundIkshváku's son his strong arms wound.

With strength unrivalled, Brahmá's gift,
He strove from earth his foe to lift.'Shall I,' he cried, 'who overthrowMount Meru and the Lord of Snow,And heaven and all who dwell therein,Be foiled by one of Ráma's kin?'But though he heaved, and toiled, and strained,Unmoved Ikshváku's son remained.His frame by those huge arms compressedThe giant's God given *****But conscious that himself * was part
p. 470
Of Vishnu, he was firm in heart.
The Wind-God's son the fight beheld,
And rushed at Rávan, rage-impelled.Down crashed his mighty hand the foeFull in the chest received the blow.His eyes grew dim, his knees gave way,And senseless on the earth he lay.
The Wind-God's son to Ráma bore
Deep-wounded Lakshman stained with gore.He whom no foe might lift or bendWas light as air to such a friend.
The dart that Lakshman's side had cleft,
Untouched, the hero's body left,

And flushing through the air afar
Resumed its place in Rávan's car;And, waxing well though wounded sore,He felt the deadly pain no more.And Rávan, though with deep wounds pained,Slowly his sense and strength regained,And furious still and undismayedOn bow and shaft his hand he laid.
Then Hanúmán to Ráma cried:
'Ascend my back, great chief, and rideLike Vishnu borne on Garud's wing,To battle with the giant king.'So, burning for the dire attack,Rode Ráma on the Vánar's back,And with fierce accents loud and slowThus gave defiance to the foe,While his strained bowstring made a soundLike thunder when it shakes the ground:'Stay, Monarch of the giants, stay,The penalty of sin to pay.Stay! whither wilt thou fly, and howEscape the death that waits thee now?'
No word the giant king returned:
His eyes with flames of fury burned.His arm was stretched, his bow was bent,And swift his fiery shafts were sent.Red torrents from the Vánar flowed:

Then Ráma near to Rávan strode,
And with keen darts that never failed,The chariot of the king assailed.With surest aim his arrows flew:The driver and the steeds he slew.And shattered with the pointed steelCar, flag, and pole and yoke and wheel.As Indra hurls his bolt to smiteMount Meru's heaven-ascending height,So Ráma with a flaming dartStruck Lanká's monarch near the heart,Who reeled and fell beneath the blowAnd from loose fingers dropped his bow.Bright as the sun, with crescent head,From Ráma's bow an arrow sped,And from his forehead, proud no more,Cleft the bright coronet he wore.
Then Ráma stood by Rávan's side
And to the conquered giant cried:'Well hast thou fought: thine arm has slainStrong heroes of the Vánar train.I will not strike or slay thee now,For weary, faint with fight art thou.To Lanká's town thy footsteps bend,And there the night securely spend.To-morrow come with car and bow,And then my prowess shall thou know.'

He ceased: the king in humbled pride
Rose from the earth and naught replied.With wounded limbs and shattered crownHe sought again his royal town.
Footnotes
468:1 'It is to be understood,' says the commentator, 
'that this is not * the Akampan who has already been 
slain.*
469:1 Ravan's son, whom Hanúmán killed when he first 
visited Lanká.
469:2 Níla was the son of Agni the God of Fire and possessed, like Milton's demons, the power of dilating 
and condensing his form at pleasure.
Next: Canto LX.: Kumbhakarna Roused.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LX.: KUMBHAKARNA ROUSED.
With humbled heart and broken pride
Through Lanká's gate the giant hied,Crushed, like an elephant beneathA lion's spring and murderous teeth,Or like a serpent 'neath the wingAnd talons of the Feathered King.Such was the giant's wild alarmAt arrows shot by Ráma's arm;Shafts with red lightning round them curled,Like Brahmá's bolts that end the world.
Supported on his golden throne,
With failing eye and humbled tone,'Giants,' he cried,' the toil is vain,Fruitless the penance and the pain,If I whom Indra owned his peer,Secure from Gods, a mortal fear.My soul remembers, now too late,Lord Brahmá's words who spoke my fate:'Tremble, proud Giant,' thus they ran,'And dread thy death from slighted man.Secure from Gods and demons live,And serpents, by the boon I give.Against their power thy life is charmed,

But against man is still unarmed.'
This Ráma is the man foretoldBy Anarama's*  
1 lips of old:
Fear, Rávan, basest of the base:For of mine own imperial raceA prince in after time shall springAnd thee and thine to ruin bring.And Vedavati, 
2 ere she died
Slain by my ruthless insult, cried:
p. 471
'A scion of my royal lineShall slay, vile wretch, both thee and thine.'She in a later birth becameKing Janak's child, now Ráma's dame.Nandís'vara  
1 foretold this fate,
And Umá  2 when I moved her hate,
And Rambhá,  3 and the lovely child
Of Varun  4 by my touch defiled.
I know the fated hour is nigh:Hence, captains, to your stations fly.Let warders on the rampart stand:Place at each gate a watchful band;And, terror of immortal eyes,Let mightiest Kumbhakarnna rise.He, slumbering, free from care and pain,

By Brahmá's curse, for months has lain.
But when Prahasta's death he hears,Mine own defeat and doubts and fears,The chief will rise to smite the foeAnd his unrivalled valour show.Then Raghu's royal sons and allThe Vánars neath his might will fall.'
The giant lords his hest obeyed,
They left him, trembling and afraid,And from the royal palace strodeTo Kumbhakarna's vast abode.They carried garlands sweet and fresh,And reeking loads of blood and flesh.They reached the dwelling where he lay,A cave that reached a league each way,Sweet with fair blooms of lovely scentAnd bright with golden ornament.His breathings came to fierce and fast,Scarce could the giants brook the blast.They found him on a golden bedWith his huge limbs at length outspread.
They piled their heaps of venison near,
Fat buffaloes and boars and deer.With wreaths of flowers they fanned his face,And incense sweetened all the place.Each raised his mighty voice as loudAs thunders of an angry cloud,

And conches their stirring summons gave
That echoed through the giant's cave.Then on his breast they rained their blows.And high the wild commotion roseWhen cymbal vied with drum and horn.And war cries on the gale upborneThrough all the air loud discord spread,And, struck with fear, the birds fell dead.But still he slept and took his rest.Then dashed they on his shaggy chestClubs, maces, fragments of the rock:He moved not once, nor felt the shock.The giants made one effort moreWith shell and drum and shout and roar.Club, mallet, mace, in fury plied,Rained blows upon his breast and side.And elephants were urged to aid,And camels groaned and horses neighed.They drenched him with a hundred pails,They tore his ears with teeth and nails.They bound together many a maceAnd beat him on the head and face;And elephants with ponderous treadStamped on his limbs and chest and head.The unusual weight his slumber broke:He started, shook his sides, and woke;And, heedless of the wounds and blows,Yawning with thirst and hunger rose,His jaws like hell gaped fierce and wide,

Dire as the flame neath ocean's tide.
Red as the sun on Meru's crestThe giant's face his wrath expressed,And every burning breath he drewWas like the blast that rushes throughThe mountain cedars. Up he raisedHis awful head with eyes that blazedLike comets, dire as Death in formWho threats the worlds with fire and stcrm.The giants pointed to their storesOf buffaloes and deer and boars,And straight he gorged him with a floodOf wine, with marrow, flesh, and blood.He ceased: the giants ventured nearAnd bent their lowly heads in fear.Then Kumbhakarna glared with eyesStill heavy in their first surprise,Still drowsy from his troubled rest,And thus the giant band addressed.'How have ye dared my sleep to break?No trifling cause should bid me wake.Say, is all well? or tell the needThat drives you with unruly speedTo wake me. Mark the words I say,The king shall tremble in dismay,
p. 472
Of Vishn'u, he was firm in heart.

   The Wind-God's son the fight beheld,
And rushed at Rávan, rage-impelled.Down crashed his mighty hand the foeFull in the chest received the blow.His eyes grew dim, his knees gave way.And senseless on the earth he lay.   The Wind-God's son to Ráma boreDeep-wounded Lakshman stained with gore.He whom no foe might lift or bendWas light as air to such a friend.The dart that Lakshman's side had cleft,Untouched, the hero's body left,And flashing through the air afarResumed its place in Rávan's car;And, waxing well though wounded sore,He felt the deadly pain no more.And Rávan, though with deep wounds pained,Slowly his sense and strength regained,And furious still and undismayedOn bow and shaft his hand he laid.   Then Hanumán to Ráma cried:'Ascend my back, great chief, and rideLike Vishnu borne on Garud's wing,To battle with the giant king.'So, burning for the dire attack,Rode Ráma on the Vánar's back,And with fierce accents loud and slowThus gave defiance to the foe,While his strained bowstring made a sound

Like thunder when it shakes the ground:
'Stay, Monarch of the giants, stay,The penalty of sin to pay.Stay; whither wilt thou fly, and howEscape the death that waits thee now?'   No word the giant king returned:His eyes with flames of fury burned.His arm was stretched, his bow was bent,And swift his fiery shafts were sent.Red torrents from the Vánar flowed:Then Ráma near to Rávan' strode,And, with keen darts that never failed,The chariot of the king assailed.With surest aim his arrows flew:The driver and the steeds he slew,And shattered with the pointed steelCar, flag and pole and yoke and wheel.As Indra hurls his bolt to smiteMount Meru's heaven-ascending height,So Ráma with a flaming dartStruck Lanká's monarch near the heart,Who reeled and fell beneath the blowAnd from loose fingers dropped his bow.Bright as the sun, with crescent head,From Ráma's bow an arrow sped,And from his forehead, proud no more,Cleft the bright coronet he wore.
Then Ráma stood by Rávan''s side

And to the conquered giant cried:
'Well hast thou fought: thine arm has slainStrong heroes of the Vánar train.I will not strike or slay thee now,For weary, faint with fight art thou.To Lanká's town thy footsteps bend,And there the night securely spend.To-morrow come with car and bow,And then my prowess shall thou know.'   He ceased: the king in humbled prideRose from the earth and naught replied.With wounded limbs and shattered crownHe sought again his royal town.
Footnotes
470:1 An ancient king of Ayodhyá said by some to have 
been Prithu's father.
470:2 The daughter of King Kus'adhwaja. She became an ascetic, and being insulted by Rávan in the woods 
where she was 
p. 471 performing penance, destroyed 
herself by entering fire, but was born again as Sitá to be in turn the destruction of him who had insulted her.
471:1 Nandís'vara was S'iva's chief attendant. Rávan 

had despised and laughed at him for appearing in the 
form of a monkey and the irritated Nandís'vara cursed him and foretold his destruction by monkeys.
471:2 Rávan once upheaved and shook Mount Kailása 
the favourite dwelling place of S'iva the consort of 
Umá, and was cursed in consequence by the offended Goddess.
471:3 Rambhá, who has several times been mentioned 
in the course of the poem, was one of the nymphs of 
heaven, and had been insulted by Rávan.
471:4 Punjikasthalá was the daughter of Varun. Rávan 
himself has mentioned in this book his insult to her, and 
the curse pronounced in consequeuce by Brahmá.
Next: Canto LX.: Kumbhakarn'a Roused.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LX.: KUMBHAKARN'A ROUSED.
With humbled heart and broken pride
Through Lánka's gate the giant hied,Crushed, like an elephant beneathA lion's spring and murderous teeth,Or like a serpent neath the wingAnd talons of the Feathered King.Such was the giant's wild alarmAt arrows shot by Ráma's arm;Shafts with red lightning round them curled,Like Brahmá's bolts that end the world.   Supported on his golden throne,With failing eye and humbled tone,'Giants,' he cried, 'the toil is vain,Fruitless the penance and the pain,If I whom Indra owned his peer,Secure from Gods, a mortal fear.My soul remembers, now too late,Lord Brahmá's words which spoke my fate:'Tremble, proud Giant,' thus they ran,'And dread thy death from slighted man.Secure from Gods and demons live,And serpents, by the boon I give.Against their power thy life is charmed,But against man is still unarmed,'

This Ráma is the man foretold
By Anaranra's  1 lips of old:
   'Fear, Rávan', basest of the base:For of mine own imperial raceA prince in after time shall springAnd thee and thine to ruin bring.And Vedavatí,  
2 ere she died
Slain by my ruthless insult, cried:
p. 473
'A scion of my royal lineShall slay, vile wretch, both thee and thine.'She in a later birth becameKing Janak's child, now Ráma's dame.Nandis'vara  
1 foretold this fate,
And Umá  2 when I moved her hate,
And Rambhá,  3 and the lovely child
Of Varun  4 by thy touch defiled.
I know the fated hour is nigh:Hence, captains, to your stations fly.Let warders on the rampart stand:Place at each gate a watchful band;And, terror of immortal eyes,Let mightiest Kumbhakarna rise.He, slumbering, free from care and pain,By Brahmá's curse, for months has lain.But when Prahasta's death he hears,Mine own defeat and doubts and fears,

The chief will rise to smite the foe
And his unrivalled valour show.Then Raghu's royal sons and allThe Vánars neath his might will fall.'   The giant lords his hest obeyed,They left him, trembling and afraid,And from the royal palace strodeTo Kumbhakarna's vast abode.They carried garlands sweet and fresh,And reeking loads of blood and flesh.They reached the dwelling where he lay,A cave that stretched a league each way,Sweet with fair blooms of lovely scentAnd bright with golden ornament.His breathings came so fierce and fast.Scarce could the giants brook the blast.They found him on a golden bedWith his huge limbs at length outspread.
They piled their heaps of venison near,
Fat buffaloes and boars and deer.With wreaths of flowers they fanned his face,And incense sweetened all the place.Each raised his mighty voice as loudAs thunders of an angry cloud,And conchs their stirring summons gaveThat echoed through the giant's cave.Then on his breast they rained their blows.And high the wild commotion rose

When cymbal vied with drum and horn.
And war cries on the gale upborneThrough all the air loud discord spread,And, struck with fear, the birds fell dead.But still he slept and took his rest.Then dashed they on his shaggy chestClubs, maces, fragments of the rock:He moved not once, nor felt the shock.The giants made one effort moreWith shell and drum and shout and roar.Club, mallet, mace, in fury plied,Rained blows upon his breast and side,And elephants were urged to aid,And camels groaned and horses neighed.They drenched him with a hundred pails,They tore his ears with teeth and nails.They bound together many a maceAnd beat him on the head and face;And elephants with ponderous treadStamped on his limbs and chest and head.The unusual weight his slumber broke:He started, shook his sides, and woke;And, heedless of the wounds and blows,Yawning with thirst and hunger rose.His jaws like hell gaped fierce and wide,Dire as the flame neath ocean's tide.Red as the sun on Meru's crestThe giant's face his wrath expressed,And every burning breath he drew

Was like the blast that rushes through
The mountain cedars. Up he raisedHis awful head with eyes that blazedLike comets, dire as Death in formWho threats the worlds with fire and storm.The giants pointed to their storesOf buffaloes and deer and boars,And straight he gorged him with a floodOf wine, with marrow, flesh, and blood.He ceased: the giants ventured nearAnd bent their lowly heads in fear.Then Kumbhakarna glared with eyesStill heavy in their first surprise,Still drowsy from his troubled rest,And thus the giant band addressed.'How have ye dared my sleep to break?No trifling cause should bid me wake.Say, is all well? or tell the needThat drives you with unruly speedTo wake me. Mark the words I say,The king shall tremble in dismay,
p. 474
The fire be quenched and Indra slainEre ye shall break my rest in vain.'   Yupáksha answered: 'Chieftain, hear;No God or fiend excites our fear.But men in arms our walls assail:

We tremble lest their might prevail.
For vengeful Ráma vows to slayThe foe who stole his queen away,And, matchless for his warlike deeds,A host of mighty Vánars leads.Ere now a monstrous Vánar came.Laid Lanká waste with ruthless flame,And Aksha, Rávan's offspring, blewWith all his warrior retinue.Our king who never trembled yetFor heavenly hosts in battle met.At length the general dread has shared,O'erthrown by Ráma's arm and spared.'   He ceased: and Kumbhakarna spake:'I will go forth and vengeance take;Will tread their hosts beneath my feet,Then triumph-flushed our king will meet.Our giant bands shall eat their fillOf Vánars whom this arm shall kill.The princes' blood shall be my draught,The chieftains' shall by you be quaffed.'He spake, and, with an eager strideThat shook the earth, to Rávan hied,
Footnotes
472:1 An ancient king of Ayodhyá said by some to have 

been Prithu's father.
472:2 The daughter of King Kus'adhwaja. She became 
an ascetic, and being insulted by Rávan in the woods 
where she was p. 473 performing penance, destroyed 
herself by entering fire, but was born again as Sitá to be in turn the destruction of him who had insulted her.
473:1 Nandisvara was S'iva's chief attendant. Rávan had 
despised and laughed at him for appearing in the form 
of a monkey and the irritated Nandis'vara cursed him and foretold his destruction by monkeys.
473:2 Rávan once upheaved and shook Mount Kailása 
the favourite dwelling place of S'iva the consort of 
Umá, and was cursed in consequence by the offended Goddess.
473:3 Rambhá, who has several times been mentioned 
in the course of the poem, was one of the nymphs of 
heaven, and had been insulted by Rávan.
473:4 Punjikasthalá was the daughter of Varun. Rávan 
himself has mentioned in this book his insult to her, and 
the curse pronounced in consequence by Brahma.
Next: Canto LXI.: The Vánars' Alarm.



Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXI.: THE VÁNARS' ALARM.
The son of Raghu near the wall
Saw, proudly towering over all,The mighty giant stride alongAttended by the warrior throng;Heard Kumbhakarna's heavy feetAwake the echoes of the street;And, with the lust of battle fired,Turned to and inquired:'Vibhíshan, tell that chieftain's nameWho rears so high his mountain frame;With glittering helm and lion eyes,Preeminent in might and sizeAbove the rest of giant birth,He towers the standard of the earth;And all the Vánars when they seeThe mighty warrior turn and flee.'   'In him,' Vibhíshan answered, 'knowVis'ravas' son, the Immortals' foe,Fierce Kumbhakaiiia, mightier farThan Gods and fiends and giants are.He conquered Yama in the fight,And Indra trembling owned his might.His arm the Gods and fiends subdued,Gandharvas and the serpent brood.

The rest of his gigantic race
Are wonderous strong by God-given grace;
But nature at his birth to him
Gave matchless power and strength of limb.Scarce was he born, fierce monster, whenHe killed and ate a thousand men.The trembling race of men, appalled,On Indra for protection called;And he, to save the suffering world,His bolt at Kumbhakarna hurled.So awful was the monster's yellThat fear on all the nations fell,He, rushing on with furious roar,A tusk from huge Airávat tore,And dealt the God so dire a blowThat Indra reeling left his foe,And with the Gods and mortals fledTo Brahmá's throne dispirited.'O Brahmá,' thus the suppliants cried,'Some refuge for this woe provide.If thus his maw the giant sateSoon will the world be desolate.'The Self-existent calmed their woe,And spake in anger to their foe:'As thou wast born, Paulastya's son,That worlds might weep by thee undone,Thou like the dead henceforth shalt be:Such is the curse I lay on thee.'

Senseless he lay, nor spoke nor stirred;
Such was the power of Brahmá's word.But Rávan, troubled for his sake,Thus to the Self-existent spake:'Who lops the tree his care has rearedWhen golden fruit has first appeared?Not thus, O Brahmá, deal with oneDescended from thine own dear son. 
1
Still thou, O Lord, thy word must keepHe may not die, but let him sleep.Yet fix a time for him to breakThe chains of slumber and awake.'He ceased: and Brahmá made reply;'Six months in slumber shall he lieAnd then arising for a dayShall cast the numbing bonds away.'Now Rávan in his doubt and dreadHas roused the monster from his bed,Who comes in this the hour of needOn slaughtered Vánars flesh to feed.Each Vánar, when his awe-struck eyesBehold the monstrous chieftain, flies.With hopeful words their minds deceive,And let our trembling hosts believeThey see no giant, but, displayed,A lifeless engine deftly made.'   Then Ráma called to Nila: 'Haste,Let troops near every gate be placed,And, armed with fragments of the rock

And trees, each lane and alley block.'
p. 475
Thus Rama spoke: the chief obeyed,
And swift the Vánars stood arrayed,As when the black clouds their battle form,The summit of a hill to storm
Footnotes
474:1 Pulastya was the son of Brahmá and father of 
Vis'ravas or Paulustya the father of Rávan and 
Kumbhakaina.
Next: Canto LXII: Rávan's Request

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXII: RÁVAN'S REQUEST
Along bright Lanká's royal road
The giant, roused from slumber, strode,While from the houses on his headA rain of fragrant flowers was shed.He reached the monarch's gate whereonRich gems and golden fretwork shone.Through court and corridor that shookBeneath his tread his way he took,And stood within the chamber whereHis brother sat in dark despair.But sudden, at the grateful sightThe monarch's eye again grew bright.He started up, forgot his fear,And drew his giant brother near.The younger pressed the elder's feetAnd paid the King observance meet,Then cried: 'O Monarch, speak thy will,And let my care thy word fulfil.What sudden terror and dismayHave burst the bonds in which I lay?'Fierce flashed the flame from Rávan's eye.As thus in wrath he made reply:' Fair time, I ween, for sleep is this,To lull thy soul in tranquil bliss,

Unheeding, in oblivion drowned,
The dangers that our lives surround.Brave Ráma, Das'aratha's son,A passage o'er the sea has won,And, with the Vánar monarch's aid.Round Lanká's walls his hosts arrayed.Though never in the deadly fieldMy Rákshas troops were known to yield,The bravest of the giant trainHave fallen by the Vánars slain.Hence comes my fear. O fierce and brave,Go forth, our threatened Lanká' save.Go forth, a dreadful vengeance take:For this, O chief, I bade thee wake.The Gods and trembling fiends have feltThe furious blows thine arm has dealt.Earth has no warrior, heaven has noneTo match thy might, Paulastya's eon,'
Next: Canto LXIII.: Kumbhakabna's Boast.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIII.: KUMBHAKABNA'S 
BOAST.
Then Kumbhakarna laughed aloud
And cried; 'O Monarch, once so proud,
We warned thee, but thou wouldst not hear
And now the fruits of sin appear.We warned thee, I, thy nobles, allWho loved thee, in thy council hall.Those sovereigns who with blinded eyesNeglect the foe their hearts despise,Soon, falling from the their high estateBring on themselves the stroke of fate.Accept at length, thy life to save,The counsel sage Vibhíshan gave,The prudent counsel spurned before,And Sita to her lord restore.'  
1
The monarch frowned, by passion movedAnd thus in angry words reproved:' Wilt thou thine elder brother school,Forgetful of the ancient ruleThat bids thee treat him as the sageWho guides thee with the lore of age?Think on the dangers of the day,

Nor idly throw thy words away:
If, led astray, by passion stirred,I in the pride of power have erred;If deeds of old were done amiss.No time for vain reproach is this.Up, brother; let thy loving careThe errors of thy king repair.'   To calm his wrath, his soul to ease,The younger spake in words like these:' Yea, from our bosoms let us castAll idle sorrow for the past.Let grief and anger be repressed:Again be firm and self-possessed.This day, O Monarch, shalt thou seeThe Vánar legions turn and flee,And Ráma and his brother slainWith their hearts' blood shall dye the plainYea, if the God who rules the dead,And Varun their battalions led;If Indra with the Storm-Gods cameAgainst me, and the Lord of Flame,Still would I fight with all and slayThy banded foes, my King, to-day.If Raghu's son this day withstandThe blow of mine uplifted hand.Deep in his breast my darts shall sink,And torrents of his life-blood drink.O fear not, in my promise trust;This arm shall lay him in the dust,

Shall leave the fierce Sugríva dyed
With gore, and Lakshman by his side,And strike the great Hanúmán down.The spoiler of our glorious town.'  
2
p. 476
Footnotes
475:1 I omit a tedious sermon on the danger of rashness 
and the advantages of prudence, sufficient to irritate a 
less passionate hearer than Rávan.
475:2 The Bengal recension assigns a very different 
speech to Kumbhakarna and makes him say that Nárad 
the messenger of the Gods had formerly told him that p. 
473 Vishn'u himself incarnate as Das'aratha's son should 
come to destroy Rávan.
Next: Canto LXIV.: Mahodar's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIV.: MAHODAR'S SPEECH.
He ceased: and when his lips were closed
Mahodar thus his rede opposed:'Why wilt thou shame thy noble birthAnd speak like one of little worth?Why boast thee thus in youthful prideRejecting wisdom for thy guide?How will thy single arm opposeThe victor of a thousand foes,Who proved in Janasthán his mightAnd slew the rovers of the night?The remnant of those legions, theyWho saw his power that fatal day.Now in this leaguered city dreadThe mighty chief from whom they fled.And wouldst thou meet the lord of men,Beard the great lion in his den,And, when thine eyes are open, breakThe slumber of a deadly snake?Who may an equal battle wageWith him, so awful in his rage.Fierce as the God of Death whom noneMay vanquish, Das'aratha's son?But, Rávan, shall the lady stillRefuse compliance with thy will?

No, listen, King, to this design
Which soon shall make the captive thine.This day through Lanka's streets proclaimThat four of us  
1 of highest fame
With Kumbhakarna at our headWill strike the son of Raghu dead.Forth to the battle will we goAnd prove our prowess on the foe.Then, if our bold attempt succeed,No further plans thy hopes will need.But if in vain our warriors strive,And Raghu's son be left alive,We will return, and, wounded sore,Our armour stained with gouts of gore,Will show the shafts that rent each frame,Keen arrows marked with Ráma's name,And say we giants have devouredThe princes whom our might o'erpowered.Then let the joyful tidings spreadThat Raghu's royal sons are dead.To all around thy pleasure show,Gold, pearls, and precious robes, bestow.Gay garlands round the portals twine,Enjoy the banquet and the wine.Then go, the scornful lady seek,And woo her when her heart is weak.
Rich robes and gold and gems display,
And gently wile her grief away.

Then will she feel her hopeless state,
Widowed, forlorn, and desolate;Know that on thee her bliss depends,Far from her country and her friends;Then, her proud spirit overthrown,The lady will be all thine own.'
Footnotes
476:1 Mahodar, Dwijihva, Sanhráda, and Vitardan.
Next: Canto LXV.: Khumbhakarna's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXV.: KHUMBHAKARNA'S 
SPEECH.
But haughty Kumbhakarna spurned
His counsel, and to Rávan turned:'Thy life from peril will I freeAnd slay the foe who threatens thee.A hero never vaunts in vain,Like bellowing clouds devoid of rain,Nor, Monarch, be thine ear inclinedTo counsellors of slavish kind,Who with mean arts their king misleadAnd mar each gallant plan and deed.O, let not words like his beguileThe glorious king of Lanka's isle.'   Thus scornful Kumbhakarna cried,And Rávan with a laugh replied:'Mahodar fears and fain would shunThe battle with Ikshvaku's son.Of all my giant warriors, whoIs strong as thou, and brave and true?Ride, conqueror, to the battle ride,And tame the foeman's senseless pride.Go forth like Yama to the field,And let thine arm thy trident wield.

Scared by the lightning of thine eye
The Vanar hosts will turn and fly;And Rama, when he sees thee near,With trembling heart will own his fear.'   The champion heard, and, well content,Forth from the hall his footsteps bent.He grasped his spear, the foeman's dread,Black iron all, both shaft and head.Which, dyed in many a battle, boreGreat spots of slaughtered victims' gore.The king upon his neck had thrownThe jewelled chain which graced his own.And garlands of delicious scentAbout his limbs for ornament.Around his arms gay bracelets clung,And pendants in his ears were hung.Adorned with gold, about his waistHis coat of mail was firmly braced,And like Náráyan  
1b or the God
Who rules the sky he proudly trod.Behind him went a mighty throngOf giant warriors tall and strong,
p. 477
On elephants of noblest breeds.With cars, with camels, and with steeds:And, armed with spear and axe and swordWere fain to battle for their lord.  
1

Footnotes
476:1b A name of Vishn'u.
Next: Canto LXVI.: Kombhakarna's Sally.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVI.: KOMBHAKARNA'S SALLY.
In pomp and pride of warlike state
The giant passed the city gate.He raised his voice: the hills, the shoreOf Lanka's sea returned the roar.The Vánars saw the chief draw nighWhom not the ruler of the sky,Nor Yama, monarch of the dead,Might vanquish, and affrighted fled.When royal Angad, Báli's son,Saw the scared Vánars turn and run,Undaunted still he kept his ground,And shouted as he gazed around:'O Nala, Níla, stay nor letYour souls your generous worth forget,O Kumud and Gaváksha, whyLike base-born Vánars will ye fly?Turn, turn, nor shame your order thus:This giant is no match for us'   They heard his voice: the flight was stayed;Again for war they stood arrayed,And hurled upon the foe a showerOf mountain peaks and trees in flower.Still on his limbs their missiles rained:Unmoved, their blows he still sustained,

And seemed unconscious of the stroke
When rocks against his body broke.Fierce as the flame when woods are dryHe charged with fury in his eye.Like trees consumed with fervent heatThey fell beneath the giant's feet.Some o'er the ground, dyed red with gore,Fled wild with terror to the shore,And, deeming that all hope was lost,Ran to the bridge they erst had crossed.Some clomb the trees their lives to save,Some sought the mountain and the cave;Some hid them in the bosky dell,And there in deathlike slumber fell.
   When Angad saw the chieftains fly
He called them with a mighty cry:'Once more, O Vánars, charge once more,On to the battle as before.In all her compass earth has not,To hide you safe, one secret spot.What! leave your arms? each nobler dameWill scorn her consort for the shame.This blot upon your names efface,And keep your valour from disgrace.Stay, chieftains; wherefore will ye run,A band of warriors scared by one?'   Scarce would they hear: they would not stay,And barely spoke in wild dismay:

'Have we not fought, and fought in vain
Have we not seen our mightiest slain?The giant's matchless force we fear,And fly because our lives are dear.'But Báli's son with gentle artDispelled their dread and cheered each heart.They turned and formed and waited stillObedient to the prince's will.
Footnotes
477:1 There is so much commonplace repetition in 
these Sallies of the Rákshas chieftains that omissions 
are frequently necessary. The usual ill omens attend the sally of Kumbhakarna, and the Canto ends with a description of the terrified Vánars' flight which is briefly repeated in different words at the begining of the next Canto.
Next: Canto LXVII.: Kumbhakarna's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVII.: KUMBHAKARNA'S 
DEATH.
Thus from their flight the Vánars turned,
And every heart for battle burned,Determined on the spot to dieOr gain a warrior's meed on high.Again the Vánars stooped to seizeTheir weapons, rocks and fallen trees;Again the deadly fight began,And fiercely at the giant ran.Unmoved the monster kept his place:He raised on high his awful mace,Whirled the huge weapon round his headAnd laid the foremost Vánars'dead.Eight thousand fell bedewed with gore,Then sank and died seven hundred more.Then thirty, twenty, ten, or eightAt each fierce onset met their fate,And fast the fallen were devouredLike snakes by Garud's beak o'erpowered.Then Dwivid from the Vánar van.Armed with an uptorn mountain, ran,Like a huge cloud when fierce winds blow,And charged amain the mountain foe.

With wondrous force the hill he threw:
O'er Kumbhakarna's head it flew,And falling on his host afarCrushed many a giant, steed, and car.Rocks, trees, by fierce Hanúmán sped,Rained fast on Kumbhakrna's head.Whose spear each deadlier missile stopped,And harmless on the plain it dropped.
p. 478
Then with his furious eyes aglowThe giant rushed upon the foe,Where, with a woody hill upheaved,Hanúmán's might his charge received.Through his vast frame the giant feltThe angry blow Hanúmán dealt.He reeled a moment, sure distressed,Then smote the Vánar on the breast,As when the War-God's furious strokeThrough Krauncha's hill a passage broke.  
1
Fierce was the blow, and deep and wideThe rent: with crimson torrents dyed,Hanúmán, maddened by the pain,Roared like a cloud that brings the rain,And from each Rákshas throat rang outLoud clamour and exultant shout.Then Nila hurled with mustered mightThe fragment of a mountain height;

Nor would the rock the foe have missed,
But Kumbhakarna raised his fistAnd smote so fiercely that the massFell crushed to powder on the grass.Five chieftains of the Vánar race  
2
Charged Kumbhakarna face to face,And his huge frame they wildly beatWith rocks and trees and hands and feet.Round Rishabh first the giant woundHis arms and hurled him to the ground,Where speechless, senseless, wounded sore,He lay his face besmeared with gore.Then Níla with his fist he slew,And S'arabh with his knee o'erthrew,Nor could Gaváksha's strength withstandThe force of his terrific hand.At Gandhamádan's eager callRushed thousands to avenge their fall,Nor ceased those Vánars to assailWith knee and fist and tooth and nail.Around his foes the giant threwHis mighty arms, and nearer drewThe captives subject to his will:Then snatched them up and ate his fill.There was no respite then, no pause:Fast gaped and closed his hell-like jaws:Yet, prisoned in that gloomy cave,Some Vánars still their lives could save:Some through his nostrils found a way,

Some through his ears resought the day.
Like Indra with his thunder, like
The God of Death in act to strike,
The giant seized his ponderous spear,And charged the foe in swift career.Before his might the Vánars fell,Nor could their hosts his charge repel.Then trembling, nor ashamed to run,They turned and fled to Raghu's son.   When Báli's warrior son  
1b beheld
Their flight, his heart with fury swelled.He rushed, with his terrific shout,To meet the foe and stay the rout.He came, he hurled a mountain peak,And smote the giant on the cheek.His ponderous spear the giant threw:Fierce was the cast, the aim was true;But Angad, trained in war and tried,Saw ere it came, and leapt aside.Then with his open hand he smoteThe giant on the chest and throat.That blow the giant scarce sustained;But sense and strength were soon regained.With force which nothing might resistHe caught the Vánar by the wrist,Whirled him, as if in pastime, round,And dashed him senseless on the ground.There low on earth his foe lay crushed:

At King Sugríva next he rushed,
Who, waiting for the charge, stood still,And heaved on high a shattered hill,He looked on Kumbhakarna dyedWith streams of blood, and fiercely cried:'Great glory has thine arm achieved,And thousands of their lives bereaved.Now leave a while thy meaner foes,And brook the hill Sugríva throws.'   He spoke, and hurled the mass he held:The giant's chest the stroke repelled,Then on the Vánars fell despair,And Rákshas clamour filled the air.The giant raised his arm, and fastCame the tremendous  
2b spear he cast.
Hanúmán caught it as it flew,And knapped it on his knee in two.The giant saw the broken spear:His clouded eye confessed his fear;Yet at Sugríva's head he sentA peak from Lanká's mountain rent.
p. 479
The rushing mass no might could stay:Sugriva fell and senseless lay.The giant stooped his foe to seize,And bore him thence, as bears the breezeA cloud in autumn through the sky.

He heard the sad Immortals sigh,
And shouts of triumph long and loudWent up from all the Rákshas crowd.Through Lanka's gate the giant passedHolding his struggling captive fast,While from each terrace, house, and towerFell on his haughty head a showerOf fragrant scent and flowery rain,Blossoms and leaves and scattered grain.  
1
   By slow degrees the Vánars' lordFelt life and sense and strength restored.He heard the giants' joyful boast:He thought upon his Vánar host.His teeth and feet he fiercely plied.And bit and rent the giant's side,Who, mad with pain and smeared with gore,Hurled to the ground the load he bore.Regardless of a storm of blowsSwift to the sky the Vánar rose,Then lightly like a flying ballHigh overleapt the city wall,And joyous for deliverance wonRegained the side of Raghu s son.And Kumbhakarna, mad with hateAnd fury, sallied from the gate,The carnage of the foe renewedAnd filled his maw with gory food.Slaying, with headlong frenzy blind,Both Vánar foes and giant kind.

   Nor would Sumitra's valiant son  2
The might of Kumbhakarna shun,
Who through his harness felt the stingOf keen shafts loosened from the string.His heart confessed the warrior's power,And, bleeding from the ceaseless showerThat smote him on the chest and side,With words like these the giant cried:'Well fought, well fought, Sumitra's son;Eternal glory hast thou won,For thou in desperate fight hast metThe victor never conquered yet,Whom, borne on huge Airávat's back,E'en Indra trembles to attack,Go, son of Queen Sumitrá, go:Thy valour and thy strength I know.Now all my hope and earnest willIs Ráma in the fight to kill.Let him beneath my weapons fall,And I will meet and conquer all.'
The chieftain, of Sumitrá born,
Made answer as he laughed in scorn:'Yea, thou hast won a victor's fameFrom trembling Gods and Indra's shame.There waits thee now a mightier foeWhose prowess thou hast yet to know.There, famous in a hundred lands,Ráma the son of Raghu stands.'

   Straight at the king the giant sped,
And earth was shaken at his tread.His bow the hero grasped and strained,And deadly shafts in torrents rained.As Kumbhakarna felt each strokeFrom his huge mouth burst fire and smoke;His hands were loosed in mortal painAnd dropped his weapons on the plain.Though reft of spear and sword and maceNo terror changed his haughty face.With heavy hands he rained his blowsAnd smote to death a thousand foes.Where'er the furious monster strodeWhile down his limbs the red blood flowedLike torrents down a mountain's side,Vánars and bears and giants died.High o'er his head a rock he swung,And the huge mass at Ráma flung.But Ráma's arrows bright as flameShattered the mountain as it came.Then Raghu's son, his eyes aglowWith burning anger, charged the foe,And as his bow he strained and triedWith fearful clang the cord replied.Wroth at the bowstring's threatening clangTo meet his foe the giant sprang.High towering with enormous frameHuge as a wood-crowned hill he came.But Ráma firm and self-possessed

In words like these the foe addressed:
'Draw near, O Rákshas lord, draw near,Nor turn thee from the fight in fear.Thou meetest Ráma face to faoe,Destroyer of the giant race.Come, fight, and thou shalt feel this hour.Laid low in death, thy conqueror's power.'   He ceased: and mad with wrath and prideThe giant champion thus replied:'Come thou to me and thou shalt findA foeman of a different kind.No Khara, no Virádha,--thouHast met a mightier warrior now.The strength of Kumbhakarna fear,And dread the iron mace I rearThis mace in days of yore subduedThe Gods and Dánav multitude.Prove, lion of Ikshváku's line.Thy power upon these limbs of mine.Then, after trial, shalt thou bleed,And with thy flesh my hunger feed.'  He ceased and Ráma, undismayed,Upon his cord those arrows laid
p. 480
Which pierced the stately Sál trees through,And Báli king of Vánars slew.They flew, they smote, but smote in vain

Those mighty limbs that felt no pain.
Then Ráma sent with surest aimThe dart that bore the Wind-God's name.The missile from the giant toreHis huge arm and the mace it bore,Which crushed the Vánars where it fell:And dire was Kumbhakarna's yell.The giant seized a tree, and thenRushed madly at the lord of men.Another dart, Lord Indra's own,To meet his furious onset thrown,His left arm from the shoulder lopped,And like a mountain peak it dropped.Then from the bow of Ráma spedTwo arrows, each with crescent head;And, winged with might which naught could stay,They cut the giant's legs away.They fell, and awful was the soundAs those vast columns shook the ground;And sky and sea and hill and caveIn echoing roars their answer gave.Then from his side the hero drewA dart that like the tempest flew--No deadlier shaft has ever flownThan that which Indra called his own--Nor could the giant's mail-armed neckThe fury of the missile check.Through skin and flesh and bone it smoteAnd rent asunder head and throat.

Down with the sound of thunder rolled
The head adorned with rings of gold,And crushed to pieces in its fallA gate, a tower, a massive wall.Hurled to the sea the body fell:Terrific was the ocean's swell,Nor could swift fin and nimble leapSave the crushed creatures of the deep.
Thus he who plagued in impious pride
The Gods and Bráhmans fought and died.Glad were the hosts of heaven, and longThe air re-echoed with their song.  
1
Footnotes
478:1 Karttikeya the God of War, and the hero and 
incarnation Paras'urama are said to have cut a passage 
through the mountain Krauncha, a part of the Himálayan range, in the same way as the immense gorge that splits the Pyrenees under the towers of Marboré was cloven at one blow of Roland's sword Durandal.
478:2 Rishabn, S'arabh, Níla, Gaváksha, and 
Gandhamádan.

478:1b Angad. The text calls him the son of the son of 
him who holds the thunderbolt, i.e.. the grandson of 
Indra.
478:2b Literally, weighing a thousand bháras. The 
bhára is a weight equal to 2000 palas, the pala, is equal 
to four kars'as, and the kars'a to 11375 French grammes or about 176 grains troy. The spear seems very light for a warrior of Kumbhakarna's strength and stature and the work performed with it.
479:1 The custom of throwing parched or roasted grain, 
with wreaths and flowers, on the heads of kings and 
conquerors when they go forth to battle and return is frequently mentioned by Indian poets.
479:2 Lakshman.
480:1 I have abridged this long Canto by omitting some 
vain repetitions, commonplace epithets and similes and 
other unimportant matter. There are many verses in this Canto which European scholars would rigidly exclude as unmistakeably the work of later rhapsodists. Even the reverent Commentator whom I follow ventures to remark once or twice: Ayam s'loka prak shipta iti bahavah, 'This s'loka or verse is in the opinion of many interpolated.'

Next: Canto LXVIII.: Rávan's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXVIII.: RÁVAN'S LAMENT.
They ran to Rávan in his hall
And told him of his brother's fall:'Fierce as the God who rules the dead,Upon the routed foe he fed;And, victor for a while, at lengthFell slain by Ráma's matchless strength,Now like a mighty hill in sizeHis mangled trunk extended lies,And where he fell, a bleeding mass,Blocks Lanká's gate tbat none may pass.'The monarch heard: his strength gave way;And fainting on the ground he lay.Grieved at the giants' mournful tale,Long, shrill was Atikáya's wail;Aud Tris'iras in sorrow bowedHis triple head, and wept aloud,Mahodar, Mahápárs'va shedHot tears and mourned their brother dead.At length, his wandering sense restored,In loud lament cried Lanká's lord:
Ah chief, for might and valour famed,
Whose arm the haughty foeman tamed,Forsaking me, thy friends and all,

Why hast thou fled to Yama's hall?
Why hast thou fled to taste no moreThe slaughtered foeman's flesh and gore?Ah me, my life is done to-day:My better arm is lopped away.Whereon in danger I relied,And, fearless, Gods and fiends defied.How could a shaft from Ráma's bowThe matchless giant overthrow,Whose iron frame so strong of yoreThe crushing bolt of Indra bore?This day the Gods and sages meetAnd triumph at their foe's defeat.This day the Vánar chiefs will boastAnd, with new ardour fired, their hostIn fiercer onset will assailOur city, and the ramparts scale.What care I for a monarch's name,For empire, or the Maithil dame?What joy can power and riches give,Or life that I should care to live,Unless this arm in mortal frayThe slayer of my brother slay?For me, of Kumbhakarna reft,Death is the only solace left;And I will seek, o'erwhelmed with woes,The realm to which my brother goes.Ah me ill-minded, not to takeHis counsel when Vibhíshan spake

When he this evil day foretold
My foolish heart was overbold:I drove my sage adviser hence,And reap the fruits of mine offence.'
p. 481
Next: Canto LXIX.: Narántak's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXIX.: NARÁNTAK'S DEATH.
Pierced to the soul by sorrow's sting
Thus wailed the evil-hearted king.Then Tris'iras stood forth and cried:'Yea, father, he has fought and died,Our bravest: and the loss is sore:But rouse thee, and lament no more.Hast thou not still thy coat of mail,Thy bow and shafts which never fail?A thousand asses draw thy carWhich roars like thunder heard afar.Thy valour and thy warrior skill,Thy God-given strength, are left thee still.Unarmed, thy matchless might subduedThe Gods and Da'nav multitude.Armed with thy glorious weapons, howShall Raghu's son oppose thee now?Or, sire, within thy palace stay;And I myself will sweep awayThy foes, like Garúd when he makesA banquet of the writhing snakesSoon Raghu's son shall press the plain,As Narak  
1 fell by Vishnu slain,
Or S'ambar  2 in rebellious pride

Who met the King of Gods  3 and died.'
   The monarch heard: his courage grew,
And life and spirit came anew.Devántak and Narántak heard,And their fierce souls with joy were stirred;And Atikáya  
4 burned to fight,
And heard the summons with delight;While from the rest loud rang the cry,'I too will fight,' 'and I,' 'and I.'   The joyous king his sons embraced,With gold and chains and jewels graced,And sent them forth with stirring speechOf benison and praise to each.Forth from the gate the princes spedAnd ranged for war the troops they led.The Vánar legions charged anew.And trees and rocks for missiles flew.They saw Narántak's mighty formBorne on a steed that mocked the storm.To check his charge in vain they strove:Straight through their host his way he clove,As springs a dolphin through the tide:And countless Vánars fell and died,
And mangled limbs and corpses lay
To mark the chief's ensanguined way,Sugrívá saw them fall or flyWhen fierce Narántak's steed was nigh,And marked the giant where he sped

O'er heaps of dying or of dead.
He bade the royal Angad faceThat bravest chief of giant race.As springs the sun from clouds dispersed,So Angad from the Vánars burst.No weapon for the fight he boreSave nails and teeth, and sought no more.'Leave, giant chieftain,' thus he spoke,'Leave foes unworthy of thy stroke,And bend against a nobler heartThe terrors of thy deadly dart.'   Narántak heard the words he spake:Fast breathing, like an angry snake,With bloody teeth his lips he pressedAnd hurled his dart at Angad's breast.True was the aim and fierce the stroke,Yet on his breast the missile broke.Then Angad at the giant flew.And with a blow his courser slew:The fierce hand crushed through flesh and bone,And steed and rider fell o'erthrown.Narántak's eyes with fury blazed:His heavy hand on high he raisedAnd struck in savage wrath the headOf Báli's son, who reeled and bled,Fainted a moment and no more:Then stronger, fiercer than beforeSmote with that fist which naught could stay,And crushed to death the giant lay.

Footnotes
481:1 Narak was a demon, son of Bhúmi or Earth, who 
haunted the city Prágjyotisha.
481:2 S'ambar was a demon of drought.
481:3 Indra.
481:4 Devántak (Slayer of Gods) Narántak (Slayer of Men) Atiktaya (Huge of Frame) and Tris'iras (Three 
Headed) were all sons of Rávan.
Next: Canto LXX.: The Death of Tris'iras.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXX.: THE DEATH OF TRIS'IRAS.
Then raged the Rákshas chiefs, and all
Burned to avenge Narántak's fall.Devántak raised his club on highAnd rushed at Angad with a cry.Behind came Tris'iras, and nearMahodar charged with levelled spear.There Angad stood to fight with three:High o'er his head he waved a tree,And at Devántak, swift and trueAs Indra's flaming bolt, it flew.But, cut by giant shafts in twain,With minished force it flew in vain.A shower of trees and blocks of stoneFrom Angad's hand was fiercely thrown;But well his club Devántak pliedAnd turned each rock and tree aside.Nor yet, by three such foes assailed,
p. 482
The heart of Angad sank or quailed.He slew the mighty beast that boreMahodar: from his head he toreA bleeding tusk, and blow on blow

Fell fiercely on his Rákshas foe.
The giant reeled, but strength regained,And furious strokes on Angad rained,Who, wounded by the storm of blows,Sank on his knees, but swiftly rose.Then Tris'iras, as up he sprang,Drew his great bow with awful clang,And fixed three arrows from his sheafFull in the forehead of the chief.Hanúmán saw, nor long delayedTo speed with Níla to his aid,Who at the three-faced giant sentA peak from Lanká's mountain rent.But Tris'iras with certain aimShot rapid arrows as it came:And shivered by their force it brokeAnd fell to earth with flash and smoke.Then as the Wind-God's son came nigh,Devántak reared his mace on high.Hanúmán smote him on the headAnd stretched the monstrous giant dead.Fierce Tris'iras with fury strainedHis bow, and showers of arrows rainedThat smote on Níla's side and chest:He sank a moment, sore distressed;But quickly gathered strength to seizeA mountain with its crown of trees.Crushed by the hill, distained with gore,Mahodar fell to rise no more.

Then Tris'iras raised high his spear
Which chilled the trembling foe with fearAnd, like a flashing meteor throughThe air at Hanúmán it flew.The Vánar shunned the threatened stroke,And with strong hands the weapon broke.The giant drew his glittering blade:Dire was the wound the weapon madeDeep in the Vánar's ample chest,Who, for a moment sore oppressed,Raised his broad hand, regaining might,And struck the rover of the night.Fierce was the blow: with one wild yellLow on the earth the monster fell,Hanúmán seized his fallen swordWhich served no more its senseless lord,And from the monger triple-neckedSmote his huge heads with crowns bedecked.Then Mahápárs'va burned with ire;Fierce flashed his eyes with vengeful fire.A moment on the dead he gazed,Then his black mace aloft was raised,And down the mass of iron cameThat struck and shook the Vánar's frame.Hanúmán's chest was wellnigh crushed,And from his mouth red torrents gushed:Yet served one instant to restore

His spirit: from the foe he tore
His awful mace, and smote, and laidThe giant in the dust dismayed.Crushed were his jaws and teeth and eyes:Breathless and still he lay as liesA summit from a mountain rentBy him who rules the firmament.
Next: Canto LXXI.: Atikáya's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXI.: ATIKÁYA'S DEATH.
But Atikáya's wrath grew high
To see his noblest kinsmen die.He, fiercest of the giant race,Presuming still on Brahmá's grace;Proud tamer of the immortals' pride,Whose power and might with Indra's vied,For blood and vengeful carnage burned,And on the foe his fury turned.High on a car that flashed and glowedBright as a thousand suns he rode.Around his princely brows was setA rich bejewelled coronet.Gold pendants in his ears he wore;He strained and tried the bow he bore,And ever, as a shaft he aimed,His name and royal race proclaimed.Scarce might the Vánars brook to hearHis clanging bow and voice of fear:To Raghu's elder son they fled,Their sure defence in woe and dread.Then Ráma bent his eyes afarAnd saw the giant in his carFast following the flying crowdAnd roaring like a rainy cloud.

He, with the lust of battle fired,
Turned to Vibhíshan and inquired:'Say, who is this, of mountain size,This archer with the lion eyes?His car, which strikes our host with awe,A thousand eager coursers draw.Surrounded by the flashing spearsWhich line his car, the chief appearsLike some huge cloud when lightnings playAbout it on a stormy day;And the great bow he joys to holdWhose bended back is bright with gold,As Indra's bow makes glad the skies,That best of chariots glorifies.O see the sunlike splendour flungFrom the great flag above him hung,Where, blazened with refulgent lines,Ráhu  
1 the dreadful Dragon shines.
Full thirty qivers near his side,His car with shafts is well supplied:
p. 483
And flashing like the light of starsGleam his two mighty scimitars.Say, best of giants, who is heBefore whose face the Vánars flee?'   Thus Ráma spake. Vibhíshan eyedThe giants chief, and thus replied:

'This Ráma, this is Rávan's son:
High fame his youthful might has won.He, best of warriors, bows his earThe wisdom of the wise to hear.Supreme is he mid those who knowThe mastery of sword and bow.Unrivalled in the bold attackOn elephant's or courser's back,He knows, beside, each subtler art,To win the foe, to bribe, or part.On him the giant hosts rely,And fear no ill when he is nigh.This peerless chieftain bears the nameOf Atikáva huge of frame,Whom Dhanyamáliní of yoreTo Rávan lord of Lanká bore.'   Roused by his bow-string's awful clang,To meet their foes the Vánars sprang.Armed with tall trees from Lanká's wood,And rocks and mountain peaks, they stood.The giant's arrows, gold-bedecked,The storm of hurtling missiles checked;And ever on his foemen pouredFierce tempest from his clanging cord;Nor could the Vánar chiefs sustainHis shafts' intolerable rain.They fled: the victor gained the placeWhere stood the lord of Raghu's race,And cried with voice of thunder: 'Lo,

Borne on my car, with shaft and bow,
I, champion of the giants, scornTo fight with weaklings humbly born.Come forth your bravest, if he dare,And right with one who will not spare.'   Forth sprang Sumitrá's noble child,  
1
And strained his ready bow, and smiled;And giants trembled as the clangThrough heaven and earth reechoing rang.The giant to his string appliedA pointed shaft, and proudly cried;'Turn, turn, Sumitrá's son and fly,For terrible as Death am IFly, nor that youthful form oppose,Untrained in war, to warriors' blows.What! wilt thou waste thy childish breathAnd wake the dormant fire of death?Cast down, rash boy, that useless bow:Preserve thy life, uninjured go.'   He ceased: and stirred by wrath & prideSumitrá's noble son replied:'By warlike deed, not words alone,The valour of the brave is shown.Cease with vain boasts my scorn to move,
And with thine arm thy prowess prove.
Borne on thy car, with sword and bow,With all thine arms, thy valour show.Fight, and my deadly shafts this day

Low in the dust thy head shall lay,
And, rushing fast in ceaseless flood,Shall rend thy flesh and drink thy blood.'   His giant foe no answer made,But on his string an arrow laid.He raised his arm, the cord he drew,At Lakshman's breast the arrow flew.Sumitrá's son, his foemen's dread,Shot a fleet shaft with crescent head,Which cleft that arrow pointed well,And harmless to the earth it fell.A shower of shafts from Lakshman's bowFell fast and furious on the foeWho quailed not as the missiles smoteWith idle force his iron coat.Then came the friendly Wind-God near,And whispered thus in Lakshman's ear:'Such shafts as these in vain assailThy foe's impenetrable mail.A more tremendous missile try,Or never may the giant die.Employ the mighty spell, and aimThe weapon known by Brahma's name.'He ceased - Sumitrá's son obeyed:On his great bow the shaft was laid,And with a roar like thunder, trueAs Indra's flashing bolt, it flew.The giant poured his shafts like rainTo check its course, but all in vain.

With spear and mace and sword he tried
To turn the fiery dart aside.Winged with a force which naught could check.It smote the monster in the neck,And, sundered from his shoulders, rolledTo earth his head and helm of gold.
Footnotes
482:1 The demon of eclipse who seizes the Sun and 
Moon.
483:1 Lakshman.
Next: Canto LXXII.: Rávan's Speech.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXII.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.
The giants bent, in rage and grief,
Their eyes upon the fallen chief:Then flying wild with fear and paleTo Rávan bore the mournful tale.He heard how Atikáya died,Then turned him to his lords, and cried:'Where are they now--my bravest--where,Wise to consult and prompt to dare?Where is Dhúmráksha, skilled to wieldAll weapons in the battle field?Akampan, and Prahasta's might,And Kumbhakarna hold in fight?These, these and many a Rákshas more,Each master of the arms he bore,
p. 484
Who every foe in fight o'erthrew,The victors none could e'er subdue,Have perished by the might of one,The vengeful arm of Raghu's son.In vain I cast mine eyes around,No match for Ráma here is found,No chief to stand before that bow

Whose deadly shafts have caused our woe.
Now, warriors, to your stations hence;Provide ye for the wall's defence,And be the As'oka garden, whereThe lady lies, your special care.Be every lane and passage barred,Set at each gate a chosen guard.And with your troops, where danger calls,Be ready to defend the walls.Each movement of the Vánars mark;Observe them when the sides grow dark;Be ready in the dead of night,And ere the morning bring the light.Taught by our loss we may not scornThese legions of the forest-born."
He ceased: the Rákshas lords obeyed;
Each at his post his troops arrayed:And, torn with pangs that pierced him throughThe monarch from the hall withdrew.
Next: Canto LXXIII.: Indrajit's Victory.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXIII.: INDRAJIT'S VICTORY.
But Indrajit the fierce and bold
With words like these his sire consoled:'Dismiss, O King, thy grief and dread,And be not thus disquieted.Against this numbing sorrow strive,For Indrajit is yet alive;And none in battle may withstandThe fury of his strong right hand.This day, O sire, thine eyes shall seeThe sons of Raghu slain by me.'
He ceased: he bade the king farewell:
Clear, mid the roar of drum and shell,The clash of sword and harness rangAs to his car the warrior sprang.Close followed by his Rákshas trainThrough Lanká's gate he reached the plain.Then down he leapt, and bade a bandOf giants by the chariot stand:Then with due rites, as rules require,Did worship to the Lord of Fire.The sacred oil, as texts ordain,With wreaths of scented flowers and grain,Within the flame in order due

That mightiest of the giants threw.
There on the ground were spear and bladeAnd arrowy leaves and fuel laid;An iron ladle deep and wide,
And robes with sanguine colours dyed.
Beside him stood a sable goat:The giant seized it by the throat,And straight from the consuming flameAuspicious signs of victory came.For swiftly, curling to the right,The fire leapt up with willing lightUndimmed by smoky cloud, and, redLike gold, upon the offering fed.They brought him, while the flame yet glowed,The dart by Brahmá's grace bestowed,And all the arms he wielded wellWere charmed with text and holy spell.
Then fiercer for the fight he burned,
And at the foe his chariot turned,While all his followers lifting highTheir maces charged with furious cry.Dire, yet more dire the battle grew,As rocks and trees and arrows flew.The giant shot his shafts like rain,And Vánars fell in myriads slain,Sugríva, Angad, Níla feltThe wounds his hurtling arrows dealt,

His shafts the blood of Gaya drank;
Hanúmán reeled and Mainda sank.Bright as the glances of the sunCame the swift darts they could not shun.Caught in the arrowy nets he wove.In vain the sons of Raghu strove;And Ráma, by the darts oppressed,His brother chieftain thus addressed:'See, first this giant warrior sendsDestruction, mid our Vánar friends,And now his arrows thick and fastTheir binding net around us cast.To Brahmá's grace the chieftain owesThe matchless power and might he shows;And mortal strength in vain contendsWith him whom Brahmá's self befriends.Then let us still with dauntless heartsEndure this storm of pelting darts.Soon must we sink bereaved of sense;And then the victor, hurrying hence,Will seek his father in his hallAnd tell him of his foemen's fall.'He ceased: o'erpowered by shaft and spellThe sons of Raghu reeled and fell.The Rákshas on their bodies gazed;And, mid the shouts his followers raised,Sped back to Lanká to relateIn Rávan's hall the princes' fate.

Next: Canto LXXIV.: The Medicinal Herbs.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXIV.: THE MEDICINAL HERBS.
The shades of falling night concealed
The carnage of the battle field,
p. 485
Which, hearing each a blazing brand,Hanúmán and Vibhíshan scanned,Moving with slow and anxious treadAmong the dying and the dead.Sad was the scene of slaughter shownWhere'er the torches' light was thrown.Here mountain forma of Vánars layWhose heads and limbs were lopped awayArms legs and fingers strewed the ground,And severed heads lay thick around.The earth was moist with sanguine streams,And sighs were heard and groans and screams.There lay Sugríva still and cold,There Angad, once so brave and bold.There Jámbaván his might reposed,There Vegadars'í's eyes were closed;There in the dust was Nala's pride,And Dwivid lay by Mainda's side.Where'er they looked the ensanguined plain

Was strewn with myriads of the slain; 1
They sought with keenly searching eyes
King Jámbaván supremely wise.His strength had failed by slow decay,And pierced with countless shafts he lay.They saw, and hastened to his side,And thus the sage Vibhíshan cried:'Thee, monarch of the bears, we seek:Speak if thou yet art living, speak.'   Slow came the aged chief's reply;Scarce could he say with many a sigh:'Torn with keen shafts which pierce each limb,My strength is gone, my sight is dim;Yet though I scarce can raise mine eyes.Thy voice. O chief. I recognize.O, while these ears can hear thee, say,Has Hanumán survived this day?'   'Why ask,' Vibhíshan cried,' for oneOf lower rank, the Wind-God's son?Hast thou forgotten, first in place,The princely chief of Raghu's race?Can King Sugríva claim no care,And Angad, his imperial heir?'   'Yea, dearer than my noblest friendsIs he on whom our hope depends.For if the Wind-God's son survive,All we though dead are yet alive.But if his precious life be fledThough living still we are but dead:

He is our hope and sure relief.'
Thus slowly spoke the aged chief:Then to his side Hanúmán came,And with low reverence named his name.
Cheered by the face he longed to view
The wounded chieftain lived anew.'Go forth,' he cried, 'O strong and brave,And in their woe the Vánars save.'No might but thine, supremely great,May help us in our lost estate,The trembling bears and Vánars cheer,Calm their sad hearts, dispel their fear.Save Raghu's noble sons, and healThe deep wounds of the winged steel.High o'er the waters of the seaTo far Himálaya's summits flee.Kailása there wilt thou behold,Aud Rishabh, with his peaks of gold.Between them see a mountain riseWhose splendour will enchant thine eyes;His sides are clothed above, below,With all the rarest herbs that grow.Upon that mountain's lofty crestFour plants, of sovereign powers possessed,Spring from the soil, and flashing thereShed radiance through the neighbouring air.One draws the shaft: one brings againThe breath of life to warm the slain;

One heals each wound; one gives anew
To faded cheeks their wonted hue.Fly, chieftain, to that mountain's browAnd bring those herbs to save us now.'   Hanúmán heard, and springing throughThe air like Vishnu's discus  
1b flew.
The sea was passed: beneath him, gayWith bright-winged birds, the mountains lay,And brook and lake and lonely glen,And fertile lands with toiling men.On, on he sped: before him roseThe mansion of perennial snows.There soared the glorious peaks as fairAs white clouds in the summer air.Here, bursting from the leafy shade,In thunder leapt the wild cascade.He looked on many a pure retreatDear to the Gods' and sages' feet:The spot where Brahmá dwells apart,The place whence Rudra launched his dart;  
2b
Vishnu's high seat and Indra's home,And slopes where Yama's servants roam.There was Kuvera's bright abode;There Brahma's mystic weapon glowed.There was the noble hill whereon
p. 486
Those herbs with wondrous lustre shone.

And, ravished by the glorious sight,
Hanúmán rested on the height.He, moving down the glittering peak,The healing herbs began to seek:But, when he thought to seize the prize,They hid them from his eager eyes.Then to the hill in wrath he spake:'Mine arm this day shall vengeance take,If thou wilt feel no pity, none,In this great need of Raghu's son.'He ceased: his mighty arms he bentAnd from the trembling mountain rentHis huge head with the life it bore,Snakes, elephants, and golden ore.O'er hill and plain and watery wasteHis rapid way again he traced.And mid the wondering Vánars laidHis burthen through the air conveyed.The wondrous herbs' delightful scentTo all the host new vigour lent.Free from all darts and wounds and painThe sons of Raghu lived again,And dead and dying Vánars healedRose vigorous from the battle field.
Footnotes

485:1 In such cases as this I am not careful to reproduce 
the numbers of the poet, which in the text which I 
follow are 670,000,000; the Bengal recension being content with thirty million less.
485:1b The discus or quoit, a sharp-edged circular 
missile is the favourite weapon of Vishnu.
485:2b To destroy Tripura the triple city in the sky, air and earth, built by Maya for a celebrated Asur or 
demon, or as another commentator explains, to destroy Randarpa or Love.
Next: Canto LXXV.: The Night Attack.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO LXXV.: THE NIGHT ATTACK.
Sugríva spake in words like these:
'Now, Vánar lords, the occasion seize.For now, of sons and brothers reft,To Rávan little hope is left:And if our host his gates assailHis weak defence will surely fail.'
At dead of night the Vánar bands
Rushed on with torches in their hands.Scared by the coming of the hostEach giant warder left his post.Where'er the Vánar legions cameTheir way was marked with hostile flameThat spread in fury to devourPalace and temple, gate and tower.Down came the walls and porches, downCame stately piles that graced the town.In many a house the fire was red,On sandal wood and aloe fed.And scorching flames in billows rolledO'er diamonds and pearls and gold.On cloth of wool, on silk brocade,On linen robes their fury preyed.Wheels, poles and yokes were burned, and all

The coursers' harness in the stall;
And elephants' and chariots' gear,The sword, the buckler, and the spear.Scared by the crash of falling beams,Mid lamentations, groans and screams
Forth rushed the giants through the flames
And with them dragged bewildered dames,Each, with o'erwhelming terror wild,Still clamping to her breast a child.The swift fire from a cloud of smokeThrough many a gilded lattice broke,And, melting pearl and coral, roseO'er balconies and porticoes.The startled crane and peacock screamedAs with strange light the courtyard gleamed,And fierce unusual glare was thrown.Cm shrinking wood and heated stone.From burning stall and stable freedRushed frantic elephant and steed.And goaded by the driving blazeFled wildly tbrough the crowded ways.As earth with fervent heat will glowWhen comes her final overthrow;From gate to gate, from court to spireProud Lanká was one blaze of fire,And every headland, rock and bayShone bright a hundred leagues away.Forth, blinded by the heat and flame

Ran countless giants huge of frame;
And, mustering for fierce attack,The Vánars charged to drive them back,While shout and scream and roar and cryReëchoed through the earth and sky.There Rama stood with stength renewed,And ever, as the foe he viewed,Shaking the distant regions rangHis mighty bow's tremendous clang.Then through the gates Nikummbha hied,And Kumbha by his brother's side,Sent forth--the bravest and the best--To battle by the king's behest.There fought the chiefs in open field,And Angad fell and Dwivid reeled.Sugríva saw: by rage impelledHe crushed the bow which Kumbha held.About his foe Sugríva woundHis arms, and, heaving from the groundThe giant hurled him o'er the bank;And deep beneath the sea he sank.Like mandar hill with furious swellUp leapt the waters where he fell.Again he rose: he sprang to landAnd raised on high his threatening hand:Full on Sugríva's chest it cameAnd shook the Vánar's massy frame,But on the wounded bone he brokeHis wrist--so furious was the stroke.

With force that naught could stay or check,
Sugríva smote him neath the neck.The fierce blow crashed through flesh and boneAnd Kumbha lay in death o'erthrown.Nikumbha saw his brother die,And red with fury flashed his eye.He dashed with mighty sway and swing
p. 487
His axe against the Vánar king;But shattered on that living rockIt split in fragments at the shock.Sugríva, rising to the blow,Raised his huge hand and smote his foe.And in the dust the giant layGasping in blood his soul away.  
1
Next: Canto XCIII.: Rávan's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XCIII.: RÁVAN'S LAMENT.
They sought the king, a mournful train,
And cried. 'My lord, thy son is slain.By Lakshmau's hand, before these eyes,The warrior fell no more to rise.No time is this for vain regret:Thy hero son a hero met;And he whose might in battle pressedLord Indra and the Gods confessed,Whose power was stranger to defeat,Has gained in heaven a blissful seat.
The monarch heard the mournful tale:
His heart was faint, his cheek was pale;His fleeting sense at length regained,In trembling tones he thus complained:'Ah me, my son, my pride: the boastAnd glory of the giant host.Could Lakshman's puny might defeatThe foe whom Indra feared to meet?Could not thy deadly arrows splitProud Mandar's peaks, O Indrajit,
And the Destroyer's self destroy?

And wast thou conquered by a boy?
I will not weep: thy noble deedHas blessed thee with immortal meedGained by each hero in the skiesWho fighting for his sovereign dies.Now, fearless of all meaner foes.The guardian Gods  
1b will taste repose:
But earth to me, with hill and plain,In* desolate, for thou art slain.Ah, whither hast thou fled, and leftThy mother, Lanká, me bereft;Left pride and state and wives behind,And lordship over all thy kind?I fondly hoped thy hand should payDue honours on my dying day:And couldst thou, O beloved, fleeAnd leave thy funeral rites to me?Life has no comfort left me, none,O Indrajit my son, my son.'
Thus wailed he broken by his woes:
But swift the thought of vengeance rose.In awful wrath his teeth he gnashed,And from his eyes red lightning flashed.Hot from his mouth came fire and smoke,As thus the king in fury spoke:
'Through many a thousand years of yore
The penance and the pain I bore,

And by fierce torment well sustained
The highest grace of Brahmá, gained,His plighted word my life assured,From Gods of heaven and fiends secured.He armed my limbs with burnished mailWhose lustre turns the sunbeams pale,In battle proof gainst heavenly bandsWith thunder in their threatening hands.Armed in this mail myself will goWith Brahmá's gift my deadly bow,And, cleaving through the foes my way,The slayers of my son will slay.'
Then, by his grief to frenzy wrought,
The captive in the grove he sought.Swift through the shady path he sped:Earth trembled at his furious tread.Fierce were his eyes: his monstrous handHeld drawn for death his glittering brand.
p. 488
There weeping stood the Maithil dame:She shuddered as the giant came.Near drew the rover of the nightAnd raised his sword in act to smite;But, by his nobler heart impelled,One Rákshas lord his arm withheld:'Wilt thou, great Monarch,' thus he cried,

'Wilt thou, to heavenly Gods allied,
Blot for all time thy glorious fame,The slayer of a gentle dame?What! shall a woman's blood be spiltTo stain thee with eternal guilt,Thee deep in all the Veda's lore?Far be the thought for evermore.Ah look, and let her lovely faceThis fury from thy bosom chase.'
He ceased: the prudent counsel pleased
The monarch, and his wrath appeased;Then to his council hall in hasteThe giant lord his steps retraced.  
1
Footnotes
487:1 I have briefly despatched Kumbha and 
Nikumbha, each of whom has in the text a long Canto 
to himself. When they fall Rávan sends forth Makaráksha or Crocodile-Eye, the son of Khara who was slain by Ráma in the forest before the abduction of Sitá. The account of his sallying forth, of his battle with Ráma and of his death by the fiery dart of that hero occupies two Cantos which I entirely pass over. Indrajit again comes forth and, rendered invisible by his magic 

art slays countless Vánars with his unerring arrows. He 
retires to the city and returns bearing in his chariot an effigy of Sitá, the work of magic, weeping and wailing by his side. He grasps the lovely image by the hair and cuts it down with his scimitar in the sight of the enraged Hanúmán and all the Vánar host. At last after much fighting of the usual kind Indrajit's chariot is broken in pieces, his charioteer is slain, and he himself falls by Lakshman's hand, to the inexpressible delight of the high-souled saints, the nymphs of heaven aud other celestial beings.
487:1b The Lokapálas are sometimes regarded as 
deities appointed by Brahmá at the creation of the 
word* to act as guardians of different orders of beings, but more commonly they are identified with the deities presiding over the four cardinal and four intermediate points of the compass, which, according to Manu V.96, are 1, Indra, guardian of the East; 2, Agni, of the South-east; 3, Yama, of the South; 4, Súrya, of the South-west: 5, Varuna, of the West; 6, Pavana or Váyu, of the North-west; 7, Kuvera, of the North; 8, Soma or Chandra, of the North-east.
Next: Canto XCVI.: Rávan's Sally.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO XCVI.: RÁVAN'S SALLY.
The groans and cries of dames who wailed
The ears of Lanká's lord assailed,For from each house and home was sentThe voice of weeping and lament.In troubled thought his head he bowed,Then fiercely loosing on the crowdOf nobles near his throne he brokeThe silence, and in fury spoke:'This day my deadly shafts shall fly,And Raghu's sons shall surely die.This day shall countless Vánars bleedAnd dogs and kites and vultures feed.Go, bid them swift my car prepare,Bring the great bow I long to bear:And let my host with sword and shieldAnd spear be ready for the field.'
From street to street the captains passed
And Rákshas warriors gathered fast.With spear and sword to pierce and strike,And axe and club and mace and pike.  
2
Then Rávan's warrior chariot  1b wrought

With gold and rich inlay was brought.
Mid tinkling bells and weapons' clangThe monarch on the chariot sprang,Which, decked with gems of every hue,Eight steeds of noble lineage drew.Mid roars of drum and shell rang outFrom countless throats a joyful shout.As, girt with hosts in warlike pride.Through Lanká's streets the tyrant hied.Still, louder than the roar of drums,Went up the cry 'He comes, he comes,Our ever conquering lord who trodBeneath his feet both fiend and God.'On to the gate the warriors sweptWhere Raghu's sons their station kept.When Rávan's car the portal passedThe sun in heaven was overcast.Earth rocked and reeled from side to sideAnd birds with boding voices cried.Against the standard of the kingA vulture flapped his horrid wing.Big gouts of blood before him dropped,His trembling steeds in terror stopped.The hue of death was on his cheek,And scarce his flattering tongue could speak,When, terrible with flash and flame,Through murky air a meteor came.Still by the hand of Death impelledHis onward way the giant held.

The Vánars in the field afar
Heard the loud thunder of his car.And turned with warriors' fierce delightTo meet the giant in the fight.He came: his clanging bow he drewAnd myriads of the Vánars slew.Some through the side and heart he cleft,Some headless on the plain were left.Some struggling groaned with mangled thighs,Or broken arms or blinded eyes.  
2b
p. 489
Footnotes
488:1 I omit two Cantos in the first of which Ráma with 
an enchanted Gandharva weapon deals destruction 
among the Rákshases sent out by Rávan, and in the second the Rákshas dames' lament the slain and mourn over the madness of Rávan.
488:2 I omit several weapons for which I cannot find 
distinctive names, and among them the Sataghní or 
Centicide, supposed by some to be a kind of fire-arms or rocket, but described by a commentator on the Mahábhárata as a stone or cylindrical piece of wood 

studded with iron spikes.
488:1b The chariots of Rávan's present army are said to 
have been one hundred and fifty million in number with 
three hundred million elephants, and twelve hundred million horses and asses. The footmen are merely said to have been 'unnumbered.'
488:2b I omit Cantos XCVII., XCVIII,and XCIX, 
which describe in the usual way three single combats 
between Sugríva and Angad on the Vánar side and Virúpaksha, Mahodar, and Mahápárs'va on the side of the giants. The weapons of the Vánars are trees and rocks: the giants fight with swords, axes, and bows and arrows. The details are generally the same as those of preceding duels. The giants fall, one in each Canto.
Next: Canto C.: Ravan In The Field.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO C.: RAVAN IN THE FIELD.
The plain with bleeding limbs was spread,
And heaps of dying and of dead.His mighty bow still Ráma strained,And shafts upon the giants rained.Still Angad and Sugríva, wroughtTo fury, for the Vánars fought.Crushed with huge rocks through chest and sideMahodar, Mahápárs'va died,And Vinúpáksha stained with goreDropped on the plain to rise no more.When Rávan saw the three o'erthrownHe cried aloud in furious tone:'Urge, urge the car, my charioteer.The haughty Vánars' death is near.This very day shall end our griefsFor leaguered town and slaughtered chiefs.Ráma the tree whose lovely fruitIs Sítá, shall this arm uproot,--Whose branches with protecting shadeAre Vánar lords who lend him aid.'Thus cried the king: the welkin rangAs forth the eager coursers sprang,And earth beneath the chariot shookWith flowery grove and hill and brook.

Fast rained his shafts: where'er he sped
The conquered Vánars fell or fled,On rolled the car in swift careerTill Raghu's noble sons were near.Then Ráma looked upon the foeAnd strained and tried his sounding bow.Till earth and all the region rangRe-echoing to the awful clang.His bow the younger chieftain bent.And shaft on shaft at Rávan sent.He shot: but Rávan little recked;Each arrow with his own he checked,And headless, baffled of its aim,To earth the harmless missile came;And Lakshman stayed his arm o'erpoweredBy the thick darts the giant showered.Fierce waxed the fight and fiercer yet,For Rávan now and Ráma met,And each on other poured amainThe tempest of his arrowy rain.While all the sky above was darkWith missles speeding to their markLike clouds, with flashing lightning twinedAbout them, hurried by the wind.Not fiercer was the wondrous fightWhen Vritra fell by Indra's might.All arts off war each foeman knew,And trained alike, his bowstring drew.Red-eyed with fury Lanká's king

Pressed his huge fingers on the string,
And fixed in Ráma's brows a flightOf arrows winged with matchless flight.
Still Raghu's son endured, and bore
That crown of shafts though wounded sore.O'er a dire dart a spell he spokeWith mystic power to aid the stroke.In vain upon the foe it smoteRebounding from the steelproof coat.The giant armed his bow anew,And wondrous weapons hissed and flew,Terrific, deadly, swift of flight,Beaked like the vulture and the kite,Or bearing heads of fearful make,Of lion, tiger, wolf and snake. 
1
Then Ráma, troubled by the stormOf flying darts in every formShot by an arm that naught could tire,Launched at the foe his dart of fire,Which, sacred to the Lord of Flame,Burnt and consumed where'er it came.And many a blazing shaft besideThe hero to his string applied.With fiery course of dazzling hueSwift to the mark each missile flew,Some flashing like a shooting star,Some as the tongues of lightning are;One like a brilliant plant, one

In splendour like the morning sun.
Where'er the shafts of Ráma burnedThe giant's darts were foiled and turned.Far into space his weapons fled,But as they flew struck thousands dead.
Next: Canto CI.: Lakshman's Fall.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CI.: LAKSHMAN'S FALL.
When Rávan saw his darts repelled,
With double rage his bosom swelled.He summoned, wroth but undismayed,A mightier charm to lend its aid.And, fierce as fire before the blast,A storm of missiles thick and fast,Spear, pike and javelin, mace and brand,Came hurtling from the giant's hand.But, mightier still, the arms employedBy Raghu's son their force destroyed,And every dart fell dulled and spentBy powers the bards of heaven had lent.With his huge mace Vibhíshan slewThe steeds that Ravan'a chariot drew.
p. 490
Then Rávan hurled in deadly ireA ponderous spear that flashed like fire:But Ráma's arrows checked its way,And harmless on the earth it lay,The giant seized a mightier spear,Which Death himself would shun with fear.Vibhíshan with the stroke had died,

But Lakshman'a hand his bowstring plied,
And flying arrows thick as hailSmote fiercely on the giant's mail.Then Rávan turned his aim aside,On Lakshman looked and fiercely cried:'Thou, thou again my wrath hast braved,And from his death Vibhíshan saved.Now in his stead this spear receiveWhose deadly point thy heart shall cleave.'
He ceased: he hurled the mortal dart
By Maya forged with magic art.The spear, with all his fury flung.Swift, flickering like a serpent's tongue,Adorned with many a tinkling bell,Smote Lakshman, and the hero fell.When Ráma saw, he heaved a sigh,A tear one moment dimmed his eye.But tender grief was soon repressedAnd thoughts of vengeance filled his breast.The air around him flashed and gleamedAs from his bow the arrows streamed;And Lanká's lord, the foeman's dread,O'erwhelmed with terror turned and fled.
Footnotes

489:1 It is not very easy to see the advantage of having 
arrows headed in the way mentioned. Fanciful names 
for war-engines and weapons derived from their resemblance to various animals are not confined to India. The "War-wolf" was used by Edward I. at the siege of Brechin, the "Cat-house" and the "Sow" were used by Edwaid III. at the siege of Dunbar.
Next: Canto CII.: Lakshman Healed.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CII.: LAKSHMAN HEALED.
But Ráma, pride of Raghu's race,
Gazed tenderly on Lakshman's face,And, as the sight his spirit broke,Turned to Sushen and sadly spoke:'Where is my power and valour? howShall I have heart for battle now,When dead before my weeping eyesMy brother, noblest Lakshman, lies?My tears in blinding torrents flow,My hand unnerved has dropped my bowThe pangs of woe have blanched my cheek.My heart is sick, my strength is weak.Ah me, my brother! Ah, that IBy Lakshman's side might sink and dieLife, war and conquest, all are vainIf Lakshman lies in battle slain.Why will those eyes my glances shun?Hast thou no word of answer, none?Ah, as thy noble spirit flownAnd gone to other worlds alone?Could thou not let thy brother seekThose worlds with thee? O speak, O speak!Rise up once more, my brother, rise,Look on me with thy loving eyes.

Were not thy steps beside me still
In gloomy wood, on breezy hill?
Did not thy gentle care assuageThy brother's grief and fitful rage?Didst thou not all his troubles share,His guide and comfort in despair?'
As Ráma, vanquished, wept and sighed
The Vánar chieftain thus replied:'Great Prince, unmanly thoughts dismiss,Nor yield thy soul to grief like this,In vain those burning tears are shed:Our glory Lakshman is not dead.Death on his brow no mark has set,Where beauty's lustre lingers yet.Clear is the skin, and tender huesOf lotus flowers his palms suifuse.O Ráma, cheer thy trembling heart;Not thus do life and body part,Now, Hanumán, to thee I speak:Hie hence to tall Mahodaya's  
1 peak
Where herbs of sovereign virtue growWhich life and health and strength bestowBring thou the leaves to balm his pain,And Lakshman shall be well again.'
He ceased: the Wind-God's son obeyed
Swift through the clouds his way he made.

He reached the hill, nor stayed to find
The wondrous herbs of healing kind,From its broad base the mount he toreWith all the shrubs and trees it bore,Sped through the clouds again and showedTo wise Sushen his woodv load.  
2
Sushen in wonder viewed the hill,And culled the sovereign salve of ill.Soon as the healing herb he found,The fragrant leaves he crushed and ground.Then over Lakshman's face he bent,Who, healed and strengthened by the scentOf that blest herb divinely sweet,Rose fresh and lusty on his feet.
Next: Canto CIII.: Indra's Car.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CIII.: INDRA'S CAR.
Then Raghu's son forgot his woe;
Again he grasped his fallen bowAnd hurled at Lanká's lord amainThe tempest of his arrowy rain.
p. 491
Drawn by the steeds his lords had brought,Again the giant turned and fought.And drove his glittering chariot nighAs springs the Day-God through the sky.Then, as his sounding bow he bent,Like thunderbolts his shafts were sent,As when dark clouds in rain time shedFierce torrents on a mountain's head.High on his car the giant rode,On foot the son of Raghu strode.The Gods from their celestial heightIndignant saw the unequal fight.Then he whom heavenly hosts revere,Lord Indra, called his charioteer:
'Haste, Matali,' he cried,'descend;

To Raghu's son my chariot lend.
With cheering words the chief address;And all the Gods thy deed will bless.'
He bowed; he brought the glorious car
Whose tinkling bells were heard afar;Fair as the sun of morning, brightWith gold and pearl and lazuliteHe yoked the steeds of tawny hueThat swifter than the tempest flew.Then down the slope of heaven he hiedAnd stayed the car by Ráma's side.'Ascend, O Chief.' he humbly cried,'The chariot which the Gods provide.The mighty bow of Indra see,Sent by the Gods who favour thee;Behold this coat of glittering mail,And spear and shafts which never fail.'
Cheered by the grace the Immortals showed
The chieftain on the chariot rode.Then as the car-borne warriors metThe awful fight raged fiercer yet.Each shaft that Rávan shot becameA serpent red with kindled flame,And round the limbs of Ráma hungWith fiery jaws and quivering tongue.But every serpent fled dismayedWhen Raghu's valiant son displayed

The weapon of the Feathered King,  1
And loosed his arrows from the string.
But Rávan armed his bow anew,And showers of shafts at Ráma flew,While the fierce king in swift careerSmote with a dart the charioteer.An arrow shot by Rávan's handLaid the proud banner on the sand,And Indra's steeds of heavenly strainFell by the iron tempest slain.On Gods and spirits of the airFell terror, trembling, and despair.The sea's white billows mounted high
With froth and foam to drench the sky.
The sun by lurid clouds was veiled,The friendly lights of heaven were paled;And, fiercely gleaming, fiery MarsOpposed the beams of gentler stars.
Then Ráma's eyes with fury blazed
As Indra's heavenly spear he raised.Loud rang the bells: the glistering headBright flashes through the region shed.Down came the spear in swift descent:The giant's lance was crushed and bent.Then Rávan's horses brave and fleetFell dead beneath his arrowy sleet.Fierce on his foeman Ráma pressed,

And gored with shafts his mighty breast.
And spouting streams of crimson dyedThe weary giant's limbs and side.  
1b
Footnotes
490:1 Apparently a peak of the Himalaya chain.
490:2 This exploit of Hanumán is related with 
inordinate prolixity in the Bengal recension (Gortesio's 
text) Among other adventures he narrowly escapes being shot by Bharat as he passes over Nandigrama near Ayodhyá. Hanumán stays Bharat in time, and gives him an account of what has befallen Ráma and Sitá in the forest and in Lanká.
491:1 As Garud the king of birds is the mortal enemy of 
serpents the weapon sacred to him is of course best 
calculated to destroy the serpent arrows of Rávan.
Next: Canto CVI.: Glory To The Sun.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CVI.: GLORY TO THE SUN.
There faint and bleeding fast, apart
Stood Rávan raging in his heart.Then, moved with ruth for Ráma's sake,Agastya  
2b came and gently spake:
'Bend, Ráma, bend thy heart and earThe everlasting truth to hearWhich all thy hopes through life will blessAnd crown thine arms with full success.The rising sun with golden rays,Light of the worlds, adore and praise:The universal king, the lordBy hosts of heaven and fiends adored.He tempers all with soft control.He is the Gods' diviner soul;And Gods above and fiends belowAnd men to him their safety owe.He Brahmá, Vishnu, S'iva, heEach person of the glorious Three,Is every God whose praise *?? tell,The King of Heaven,  
3b the Lord of Hell:  4b
Each God revered from times of old,The Lord of War,  
5b the King of Gold:  6b

p. 492
Mahendra, Time and Death is he,  1
The Moon, the Ruler of the Sea.
He hears our praise in every form,--The manes,  
2 Gods who ride the storm,  3
The As'vins,  4 Manu,  5 they who stand
Round Indra,  6 and the Sádhyas'  7 band
He is the air, and life and fire,The universal source and sire:He brings the seasons at his call,Creator, light, and nurse of all.His heavenly course he joys to run,Maker of Day, the golden sun.The steeds that whirl his car are seven,  
8
The flaming steeds that flash through heaven.Lord of the sky, the conqueror partsThe clouds of night with glistering darts.He, master of the Vedas' lore,Commands the clouds' collected store:He is the rivers' surest friend;He bids the rains, and they descend.Stars, planets, constellations ownTheir monarch of the golden throne.Lord of twelve forms,  
9 to thee I bow,
Most glorious King of heaven art thou.O Ráma, he who pays arightDue worship to the Lord of LightShall never fall oppressed by ill,

But find a stay and comfort still.
Adore with all thy heart and mindThis God of Gods, to him resigned;And thou his saving power shalt knowVictorious o'er thy giant foe.  
10
Footnotes
491:1b I omit Cantos CIV. and CV. in which the fight is 
renewed and Rávan severely reprimands his charioteer 
for timidity and want of confidence in his master's prowess, and orders him to charge straight at Ráma on the next occasion.
491:2b The celebrated saint who has on former 
occasions assisted Ráma with his gifts and counsel.
491:3b Indra.
491:4b Yama.
491:5b Kartikeva.*
491:6b Kuvera.

492:1 Varun.
492:2 The Pitris, forefathers or spirits of the dead, are of 
two kinds, either the spirits of the father, grandfathers 
and great- grandfathers of an individual or the progenitors of mankind generally, to both of whom obsequial worship is paid and oblations of food are presented.
492:3 The Maruts or Storm-Gods.
492:4 The Heavenly Twins, the Castor and Pollux of 
the Hindus.
492:5 The Man par excellence, the representative man and father of the human race regarded also as God.
492:6 The Vasus, a class of deities originally personifications of natural phenomena.
492:7 A class of celestial beings who dwell between the earth and the sun.
492:8 The seven horses are supposed to symbolize the seven days of the week.
492:9 One for each month in the year.

492:10 This Canto does not appear in the Bengal 
recension. It comes in awkwardly and may I think be 
considered as an interpolation, but I paraphrase a portion of it as a relief after so much fighting and carnage, and as an interesting glimpse of the monotheistic ideas which underlie the Hindu religion. The hymn does not readily lend itself to metrical translation, and I have not attempted here to give a faithful rendering of the whole. A literal version of the text and the commentary given in the Calcutta edition will be found in the Additional Notes. 
A canto is here omitted. It contains fighting of the 
ordinary kind between Ráma and Rávan, and a description of sights and sounds of evil omen foreboding the destruction of the giant.
Next: Canto CVIII.: The Battle.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CVIII.: THE BATTLE.
He spoke, and vanished: Ráma raised
His eyes with reverence meet, and praisedThe glorious Day-God full in view:Then armed him for the fight anew.Urged onward by his charioteerThe giant's foaming steeds came near,And furious was the battle's dinWhere each resolved to die or win.The Rákshas host and Vánar bandsStood with their weapons in their hands,And watched in terror and dismayThe fortune of the awful fray.The giant chief with rage inflamedHis darts at Ráma's pennon aimed;But when they touched the chariot madeBy heavenly hands their force was stayed.Then Ráma's breast with fury swelled;He strained the mighty bow he held.And straight at Rávan's banner flewAn arrow as the string he drew--A deadly arrow swift of flight,Like some huge snake ablaze with light,Whose fury none might e'er repel,--And, split in twain, the standard fell.

At Ráma's steeds sharp arrows, hot
With flames of fire, the giant shot.Unmoved the heavenly steeds sustainedThe furious shower the warrior rained,As though soft lotus tendrils smoteEach haughty crest and glossy coat,Then volleyed swift by magic art,Tree, mountain peak and spear and dart,Trident and pike and club and maceFlew hurtling straight at Ráma's face.But Ráma with his steeds and carEscaped the storm which fell afarWhere the strange missiles, as they rushedTo earth, a thousand Vánars crushed.
p. 493
Next: Canto CIX.: The Battle.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CIX.: THE BATTLE.
With wondrous power and might and skill
The giant fought with Ráma still.Each at his foe his chariot drove,And still for death or victory strove.The warriors' steeds together dashed,And pole with pole reëchoing clashed.Then Ráma launching dart on dartMade Rávan's coursers swerve and start.Nor was the lord of Lanká slowTo rain his arrows on the foe,Who showed, by fiery points assailed,No trace of pain, nor shook nor quailed.Dense clouds of arrows Ráma shotWith that strong arm which rested not,And spear and mace and club and brandFell in dire rain from Rávan's hand.The storm of missiles fiercely castStirred up the oceans with its blast,And Serpent-Gods and fiends who dwellBelow were troubled by the swell.The earth with hill and plain and brookAnd grove and garden reeled and shook:The very sun grew cold and pale,And horror stiled the rising gale.

God and Gandharva, sage and saint
Cried out, with grief and terror faint:O may the prince of Raghu' lineGive peace to Bráhmans and to kine,And, rescuing the worlds, o'erthrowThe giant king our awful foe.'
Then to his deadly string the pride
Of Raghu's race a shaft applied.Sharp as a serpent's venomed fangStraight to its mark the arrow sprang,And from the giant's body shredWith trenchant steel the monstrous head.There might the triple world beholdThat severed head adorned with gold.But when all eyes were bent to view,Swift in its stead another grew.Again the shaft was pointed well:Again the head divided fell;But still as each to earth was castAnother head succeeded fast.A hundred, bright with fiery flame,Fell low before the victor's aim,Yet Rávan by no sign betrayedThat death was near or strength decayed.The doubtful fight he still maintained,And on the foe his missiles rained.In air, on earth, on plain, on hill,With awful might he battled still;

And through the hours of night and day
The conflict knew no pause or stay.
Next: Canto CX.: Rávan's Death.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CX.: RÁVAN'S DEATH.
Then Mátali to Ráma cried:
'Let other arms the day decide.Why wilt thou strive with useless toilAnd see his might thy efforts foil?Launch at the foe thy dart whose fireWas kindled by the Almighty Sire.'He ceased: and Raghu's son obeyed:Upon his string the hero laidAn arrow, like a snake that hissed.Whose fiery flight had never missed:The arrow Saint Agastya gaveAnd blessed the chieftain's life to saveThat dart the Eternal Father madeThe Monarch of the Gods to aid;By Brahmá's self on him bestowedWhen forth to fight Lord Indra rode.'Twas feathered with the rushing wind;The glowing sun and fire combinedTo the keen point their splendour lent;The shaft, ethereal element,By Meru's hill and Mandar, prideOf mountains, had its weight supplied.He laid it on the twisted cord,He turned the point at Lanká's lord,

And swift the limb-dividing dart
Pierced the huge chest and cleft the heart,And dead he fell upon the plainLike Vritra by the Thunderer slain.The Rákahas host when Rávan fellSent forth a wild terrific yell,Then turned and fled, all hope resigned,Through Lanká's gates, nor looked behindHis voice each joyous Vánar raised,And Ráma, conquering Ráma, praised.Soft from celestial minstrels cameThe sound of music and acclaim.Soft, fresh, and cool, a rising breezeBrought odours from the heavenly trees,And ravishing the sight and smellA wondrous rain of blossoms fell:And voices breathed round Raghu's son:'Champion of Gods, well done, well done.'
Next: Canto CXI.: Vibhíshan's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXI.: VIBHÍSHAN'S LAMENT.
Vibhíshan saw his brother slain,
Nor could his heart its woe contain.O'er the dead king he sadly bentAnd mourned him with a loud lament:'O hero, bold and brave.' he cried,'Skilled in all arms, in battle tried.Spoiled of thy crown, with limbs outspread.
p. 494
Why wilt thou press thy gory bed?Why slumber on the earth's cold breast,When sumptuous couches woo to rest?Ah me, my brother over bold,Thine is the fate my heart foretold:But love and pride forbade to hearThe friend who blamed thy wild career.Fallen is the sun who gave us light,Our lordly moon is veiled in night.Our beacon fire is dead and coldA hundred waves have o'er it rolled.What could his light and fire availAgainst Lord Ráma's arrowy hail?Woe for the giants' royal tree,

Whose stately height was fair to see.
His buds were deeds of kingly grace,His bloom the sons who decked his race.With rifled bloom and mangled boughThe royal tree lies prostrate now.''Nay, idly mourn not," Ráma cried,'The warrior king has nobly died,Interpid hero, firm through all.So fell he as the brave should fall;And ill beseems it chiefs like usTo weep for those who perish thus.Be firm: thy causeless grief restrain,And pay the dues that yet remain,
Again Vibhíshan sadly spoke:
'His was the hero arm that brokeEmbattled Gods' and Indra's might,Unconquered ere to-day in fight.He rushed against thee, fought and fell,As Ocean, when his waters swell,Hurling his might against a rock,Falls spent and shattered by the shockWoe for our king's untimely end,The generous lord the trusty friend:Our sure defence when fear arose,A dreaded scourge to stubborn foes.O, let the king thy hand has slainThe honours of the dead obtain.'

Then Ráma answered. 'Hatred dies
When low in dust the foeman lies.Now triumph bids the conflict cease,And knits us in the bonds of peace.Let funeral rites be duly paid.And be it mine thy toil to aid.'
Next: Canto CXII.: The Rákshas Dames.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXII.: THE RÁKSHAS DAMES.
High rose the universal wail
That mourned the monarch's death, and, paleWith crushing woe, her hair unbound,Her eyes in floods of sorrow drowned,Forth from the inner chambers cameWith trembling feet each royal dame,Heedless of those who bade them stayThey reached the field where Rávan lay;
There falling by their husband's side,
'Ah, King! ah dearest lord!' they cried.Like creepers shattered by the stormThey threw them on his mangled form.One to his bleeding bosom creptAnd lifted up her voice and wept.About his feet one mourner clung.Around his neck another hung.One on the giant's severed head.Her pearly tears in torrents shedFast as the drops the summer showerPours down upon the lotus flower.'Ah, he whose arm in anger rearedThe King of Gods and Yama feared.While panic struck their heavenly train,

Lies prostrate in the battle slain.
Thy haughty heart thou wouldst not bend,Nor listen to each wiser friend.Ah, had the dame, as they implored,Been yielded to her injured lord,We had not mourned this day thy fall,And happy had it been for all.Then Ráma and thy friends contentIn blissful peace their days had spent.Thine injured brother had not fled.Nor giant chiefs and Vánars bled.Yet for these woes we will not blame.Thy fancy for the Maithil dame,Fate, ruthless Fate, vhom none may bendHas urged thee to thy hapless end.'
Next: Canto CXIII.: Mandodarí's Lament.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXIII.: MANDODARÍ'S LAMENT.
While thus they wept, supreme in place,
The loveliest for form and face.Mandodarí drew near alone,Looked on her lord and made her moan:'Ah Monarch, Indra feared to standIn fight before thy conquering hand.From thy dread spear the Immortals ran;And art thou murdered by a man?Ah,'twas no child of earth, I know,That smote thee with that mortal blow.'Twas Death himself in Ráma's shape,That slew thee: Death whom none escape.Or was it he who rules the skiesWho met thee, clothed in man's disguise?Ah no, my lord, not Indra: heIn battle ne'er could look on thee.One only God thy match I deem:It was Vishnu's self, the Lord Supreme,Whose days through ceaseless time extendAnd ne'er began and ne'er shall end:He with the discus, shell, and mace.Brought ruin on the giant race.Girt by the Gods of heaven arrayedLike Vánar hosts his strength to aid,

He Ráma's shape and arms assumed
p. 495
And slew the king whom Fate had doomed,
In Janasthán when Khara diedWith giant legions by his side,No mortal was the unconquered foeIn Ráma's form who struck the blow.When Hanumán the Vanár cameAnd burnt thy town with hostile flame,I counselled peace in anxious fear:I counselled, but thou wouldst not hear.Thy fancy for the foreign dameHas brought thee death and endless shame.Why should thy foolish fancy roam?Hadst thou not wives as fair at home?In beauty, form and grace could she,Dear lord, surpass or rival me?Now will the days of Sítá glideIn tranquil joy by Ráma's side:And I--ah me, around me ravesA sea of woe with whelming waves.With thee in days of old I trodEach spot beloved by nymph and God;I stood with thee in proud delightOn Mandar's side and Meru's height;With thee, my lord, enchanted strayedIn Chaitraratha's  
1 lovely shade,

And viewed each fairest scene afar
Transported in thy radiant car.But source of every joy wast thou,And all my bliss is ended now.
Then Ráma to Víbhíshan cried:
'Whate'er the ritual bids, provide.Obsequial honours duly pay,And these sad mourners grief allay.'Vibhíshan answered, wise and true.For duty's changeless law he knew:'Nay one who scorned all sacred vowsAnd dared to touch another's spouse,Fell tyrant of the human race,With funeral rites I may not grace.'
Him Raghu's royal son, the best
Of those who love the law, addressed:'False was the rover of the night,He loved the wrong and scorned the right.Yet for the fallen warrior pleadThe dauntless heart, the valorous deed.Let him who ne'er had brooked defeat,The chief whom Indra feared to meet,The ever-conquering lord, obtainThe honours that should grace the slain.'Vibhíshan bade his friends prepareThe funeral rites with thoughtful care.Himself the royal palace sought

Whence sacred fire was quickly brought,
With sandal wood and precious scentsAnd pearl and coral ornaments.Wise Bráhmans, while the tears that flowedDown their wan cheeks their sorrow sowed,
Upon a golden litter laid
The corpse in finest ropes arrayed.Thereon were flowers and pennons hung,And loud the monarch's praise was sung.Then was the golden litter raised,While holy fire in order blazed.And first in place Vibhíshan ledThe slow procession of the dead,Behind, their cheeks with tears bedewed,Came sad the widowed multitude.Where, raised as Bráhmans ordered, stoodPiled sandal logs, and scented wood,The body of the king was setHigh on a deerskin coverlet.Then duly to the monarch's shadeThe offerings for the dead they paid,And southward on the eastern sideAn altar formed and fire supplied.Then on the shoulder of the deadThe oil and clotted milk were shed.All rites were done as rules ordain:The sacrificial goat was slain.Next on the corpse were perfumes thrown

And many a flowery wreath was strown;
And with Vibhíshan's ready aidRich vesture o'er the king was laid.Then while the tears their cheeks bedewedParched grain upon the dead they strewed;Last, to the wood, as rules require,Vibhíshan set the kindling fire.
Then having bathed, as texts ordain,
To Lanká went the mourning train.Vibhíshan, when his task was done,Stood by the side of Raghu's son.And Ráma, freed from every foe,Unstrung at last his deadly bow,And laid the glittering shafts aside.And mail by Indra's love supplied.
Footnotes
495:1 The garden of Kuvera, the God of Riches.
Next: Canto CXIV: Vibhíshan Consecrated.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXIV: VIBHÍSHAN 
CONSECRATED.
Joy reigned in heaven where every eye
Had seen the Lord of Lanká die.In cars whose sheen surpassed the sun'sTriumphant rode the radiant ones:And Rávan's death, by every tongue.And Ráma's glorious deeds were sung.They praised the Vánars true and brave,The counsel wise Sugríva gave.The deeds of Hanumán they told,The valiant chief supremely bold,The strong ally, the faithful friend.And Sitá's truth which naught could bend.
To Mátali, whom Indra sent,
His head the son of Raghu bent:And he with fiery steeds who cloveThe clouds again to Swarga drove.
p. 496
Round King Sugríva brave and trueHis arms in rapture Ráma threw,

Looked on the host with joy and pride,
And thus to noble Lakshman cried:
'Now let king-making drops be shed,
Dear brother, on Vibhíshan's headFor truth and friendship nobly shown,And make him lord of Rávan's throne.'This longing of his heart he told:And Lakshman took an urn of goldAnd bade the wind-fleet Vánars bringSea water for the giants' king.The brimming urn was swiftly brought:Then on a throne superbly wroughtVibhíshan sat, the giants' lord,And o'er his brows the drops were poured.As Raghu's son the rite beheldHis loving heart with rapture swelled:But tenderer thoughts within him woke,And thus to Hanumán he spoke:
'Go to my queen: this message give:
Say Lakshman and Sugríva live.The death of Lanká's monarch tell,And bid her joy, for all is well.'
Next: Canto CXV.: Sitá's Joy.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXV.: SITÁ'S JOY.
The Vánar chieftain bowed his head.
Within the walls of Lanká sped,Leave from the new-made king obtained,And Sítá's lovely garden gained.Beneath a tree the queen he found,Where Rákshas warders watched around.Her pallid cheek, her tangled hair,Her raiment showed her deep despair,Near and more near the envoy cameAnd gently hailed the weeping dame.She started up in sweet surprise,And sudden joy illumed her eyes.For well the Vánar's voice she knew,And hope reviving sprang and grew.
'Fair Queen,' he said, 'our task is done:
The foe is slain and Lanká won.Triumphant mid triumphant friendsKind words of greeting Ráma sends.'Blest for thy sake, O spouse most true,My deadly foe I met and slew.Mine eyes are strangers yet to sleep:I built a bridge athwart the deepAnd crossed the sea to Lanká's shore

To keep the mighty oath I swore.
Now, gentle love, thy cares dispel,And weep no more, for all is well.Fear not in Rávan's house to stayFor good Vibhíshan now bears sway,For constant truth and friendship known.
Regard his palace as thine own.'
He greets thee thus thy heart to cheer,And urged by love will soon be here.'
Then flushed with joy the lady's cheek.
Her eyes o'erflowed, her voice was weak;But struggling with her sobs she brokeHer silence thus, and faintly spoke:'So fast the flood of rapture came,My trembling tongue no words could frame.Ne'er have I heard in days of blissA tale that gave such joy as this.More precious far than gems and goldThe message which thy lips have told.'
His reverent hands the Vánar raised
And thus the lady's answer praised:'Sweet are the words, O Queen, which thouTrue to thy lord, hast spoken now,Better than gems and pearls of price,Yea, or the throne of Paradise.But, lady, ere I leave this place,

Grant me, I pray, a single grace.
Permit me, and this vengeful handShall slay thy guards, this Rákshas band,Whose cruel insult threat and scornThy gentle soul too long has borne.'
Thus, stern of mood, Hanumán cried:
The Maithil lady thus replied:'Nay, be not wroth with servants: they,When monarchs bid must needs obey.And, vassals of their lords, fulfilEach fancy of their sovereign will.To mine own sins the blame impute,For as we sow we reap the fruit.The tyrant's will these dames obeyedWhen their fierce threats my soul dismayed.'
She ceased: with admiration moved
The Vánar chief her words approved:'Thy speech,' he cried, 'is worthy oneWhom love has linked to Raghu's son.Now speak, O Queen, that I may knowThy pleasure, for to him I go.'The Vánar ceased: then Janak's childMade answer as she sweetly smiled:'My first, my only wish can be,O chief, my loving lord to see.'Again the Vánar envoy spoke,And with his words new rapture woke:

'Queen, ere this sun shall cease to shine
Thy Ráma's eyes shall look in thine.Again the lord of Raghu's raceShall turn to thee his moon-bright face.His faithful brother shall thou seeAnd every friend who fought for thee,And greet once more thy king restoredLike S'achí  
1 to her heavenly lord.'
To Raghu's son his steps he bentAnd told the message that she sent.
p. 497
Footnotes
496:1 The consort of Indra.
Next: Canto CXVI.: The Meeting.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXVI.: THE MEETING.
He looked upon that archer chief
Whose full eye mocked the lotus leaf,Arid thus the noble Vánar spake:'Now meet the queen for whose dear sakeThy mighty task was first begun,And now the glorious fruit is won.Overwhelmed with woe thy lady lies,The hot tears streaming from her eyes.And still the queen must long and pineUntil those eyes be turned to thine.'
But Ráma stood in pensive mood,
And gathering tears his eyes bedewed.His sad looks sought the ground: he sighedAnd thus to King Vibhíshan cried:'Let Sítá bathe and tire her headAnd hither to my sight be ledIn raiment sweet with precious scent,And gay with golden ornament.'
The Rákshas king his palace sought,
And Sítá from her bower was brought.Then Rákshas bearers tall and strong,

Selected from the menial throng,
Through Lanká's gate the queen, arrayedIn glorious robes and gems, conveyed.Concealed behind the silken screen,Swift to the plain they bore the queen,While Vánars, close on every side,With eager looks the litter eyed.The warders at Vibhíshan's hestThe onward rushing throng repressed,While like the roar of ocean loudRose the wild murmur of the crowd.The son of Raghu saw and movedWith anger thus the king reproved:'Why vex with hasty blow and threatThe Vánars, and my rights forget?Repress this zeal, untimely shown:I count this people as mine own.A woman's guard is not her bower,The lofty wall, the fenced tower:Her conduct is her best defence,And not a king's magnificence.At holy rites, in war and woe,Her face unveiled a dame may show;When at the Maiden's Choice  
1 they meet,
When marriage troops parade the street.And she, my queen, who long has lain
In prison racked with care and pain,
May cease a while her face to hide,

For is not Ráma by her side?
Lay down the litter: on her feetLet Sítá come her lord to meet.And let the hosts, of woodland raceLook near upon the lady's face.'
Then Lakshman and each Vánar chief
Who heard his words were filled with grief.The lady's gentle spirit sank,And from each eye in fear she shrank,As, her sweet eyelids veiled for shame.Slowly before her lord she came.While rapture battled with surpriseShe raised to his her wistful eyes.Then with her doubt and fear she strove,And from her breast all sorrow drove.Regardless of the gathering crowd,Bright as the moon without a cloud,She bent her eyes, no longer dim,In joy and trusting love on him.
Footnotes
497:1 The Swayamvara, Self-choice or election of a 
husband by a princess or daughter of a Kshatriya at a 
public assembly of suitors held for the purpose. For a 

description of the ceremony see Nala and Damayantí an 
episode of the Mahábhárat translated by the late Dean Milman, and Idylls from the Sanskrit.
Next: Canto CXVII.: Sítá's Disgrace.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXVII.: SÍTÁ'S DISGRACE.
He saw her trembling by his side,
And looked upon her face and cried:'Lady, at length my task is done,And thou, the prize of war, art won,This arm my glory has retrieved,And all that man might do achieved;The insulting foe in battle slainAnd cleared mine honour from its stain.This day has made my name renownedAnd with success my labour crowned.Lord of myself, the oath I sworeIs binding on my soul no more.If from my home my queen was reft,This arm has well avenged the theft,And in the field has wiped awayThe blot that on mine honour lay.The bridge that spans the foaming flood,The city red with giants' blood;The hosts by King Sugríva ledWho wisely counselled, fought and bled;Vibhíshan's love, our guide and stay--All these are crowned with fruit to-day.But, lady,'twas not love for theeThat led mine army o'er the sea.

'Twas not for thee our blood was shed,
Or Lanká filled with giant dead.No fond affection for my wifeInspired me in the hour of strife.I battled to avenge the causeOf honour and insulted laws.My love is fled, for on thy fameLies the dark blot of sin and shame;And thou art hateful as the light
p. 498
That flashes on the injured sight.The world is all before thee: flee:Go where thou wilt, but not with me.How should my home receive againA mistress soiled with deathless stain?How should I brook the foul disgrace,Scorned by my friends and all my race?For Rávan bore thee through the sky,And fixed on thine his evil eye.About thy waist his arms he threw,Close to his breast his captive drew,And kept thee, vassal of his power,An inmate of his ladies' bower.'
Next: Canto CXVIII.: Sítá's Reply.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXVIII.: SÍTÁ'S REPLY.
Struck down with overwhelming shame
She shrank within her trembling frame.Each word of Ráma's like a dartHad pierced the lady to the heart;And from her sweet eyes unrestrainedThe torrent of her sorrows, rained.Her weeping eyes at length she dried,And thus mid choking sobs replied:'Canst thou, a high-born prince, dismissA hign-born dame with speech like this?Such words befit the meanest hind,Not princely birth and generous mind,By all my virtuous life I swearI am not what thy words declare.If some are faithless, wilt thou findNo love and truth in womankind?Doubt others if thou wilt, but ownThe truth which all my life has shown.If, when the giant seized his prey,Within his hated arms I lay,And felt the grasp I dreaded, blameFate and the robber, not thy dame.What could a helpless woman do?My heart was mine and still was true,

Why when Hanúmán sent by thee
Sought Lanká's town across the sea,Couldst thou not give, O lord of men,Thy sentence of rejection then?Then in the presence of the chiefDeath, ready death, had brought relief,Nor had I nursed in woe and painThis lingering life, alas in vain.Then hadst thou shunned the fruitless strifeNor jeopardied thy noble life,But spared thy friends and bold alliesTheir vain and weary enterprise.Is all forgotten, all? my birth,Named Janak's child, from fostering earth?That day of triumph when a maidMy trembling hand in thine I laid?My meek obedience to thy will,My faithful love through joy and ill,
That never failed at duty's call--
O King, is all forgotten, all?'
To Lakshman then she turned and spoke
While sobs and sighs her utterance broke:'Sumitrá's son, a pile prepare,'My refuge in my dark despair.I will not live to bear this weightOf shame, forlorn and desolate.The kindled fire my woes shall end

And be my best and surest friend.'
His mournful eyes the hero raised
And wistfully on Ráma gazed,In whose stern look no ruth was seen,No mercy for the weeping queen.No chieftain dared to meet those eyes,To pray, to question or advise.
The word was passed, the wood was piled
And fain to die stood Janak's child.She slowly paced around her lord.The Gods with reverent act adored,Then raising suppliant hands the dameFrayed humbly to the Lord of Flame;'As this fond heart by virtue swayedFrom Raghu's son has never strayed,So, universal witness, FireProtect my body on the pyre,As Raghu's son has idly laidThis charge on Sítá, hear and aid.'
She ceased: and fearless to the last
Within the flame's wild fury passed.Then rose a piercing cry from allDames, children, men, who saw her fallAdorned with gems and gay attireBeneath the fury of the fire.

Next: Canto CXIX.: Glory To Vishnu.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXIX.: GLORY TO VISHNU.
The shrill cry pierced through Ráma's ears
And his sad eyes o'erflowed with tears,When lo, transported through the skyA glorious band of Gods was nigh.Ancestral shades,  
1 by men revered,
In venerable state appeared.And he from whom all riches flow,  
2
And Yama Lord who reigns below:King Indra, thousand-eyed, and heWho wields the sceptre of the sea.  
3
The God who shows the blazoned, bull, 4
And Brahmá Lord most bountifulBy whose command the worlds were madeAll these on radiant cars conveyed,
p. 499
Brighter than sun-beams, sought the placeWhere stood the prince of Raghu's race,And from their glittering seats the bestOf blessed Gods the chief addressed:
'Couldst thou, the Lord of all, couldst thou,

Creator of the worlds, allow
Thy queen, thy spouse to brave the fireAnd give her body to the pyre?Dost thou not yet, supremely wise,Thy heavenly nature recognize?They ceased: and Ráma thus began:'I deem myself a mortal man.Of old Ikshváku's line, I springFrom Das'aratha Kosal's king.'He ceased: and Brahmá's self replied:'O cast the idle thought aside.Thou art the Lord Náráyan, thouThe God to whom all creatures bow.Thou art the saviour God who woreOf old the semblance of a boar;Thou he whose discus overthrowsAll present, past and future foes;Thou Brahmá, That whose days extendWithout beginning, growth or end;The God, who, bears the bow of horn,Whom four majestic arms adorn;Thou art the God who rules the senseAnd sways with gentle influence;Thou all-pervading Vishnu LordWho wears the ever-conquering sword;Thou art the Guide who leads aright,Thou Krishna of unequalled might.Thy hand, O Lord, the hills and plains,And earth with all her life sustains;

Thou wilt appear in serpent form
When sinks the earth in fire and storm.Queen Sítá of the lovely browsIs Lakshmí thy celestial spouse.To free the worlds from Rávan thouWouldst take the form thou wearest now.Rejoice: the mighty task is done:Rejoice, thou great and glorious one.The tyrant, slain, thy labours end:Triumphant now to heaven ascend.High bliss awaits the devoteeWho clings in loving faith to thee,Who celebrates with solemn praiseThe Lord of ne'er beginning days.On earth below, in heaven aboveGreat joy shall crown his faith and love.And he who loves the tale divineWhich tells each glorious deed of thineThrough life's fair course shall never knowThe fierce assault of pain and woe.' 
1
Footnotes
498:1 The Pitris or Manes, the spirits of the dead.
498:2 Kuvera, the God of Wealth.

498:3 Varun, God of the sea.
498:4 Máhadeva or S'iva whose ensign is a bull.
499:1 The Address to Ráma, both text and commentary, 
will be found literally translated in the Additional 
Notes. A paraphrase of a portion is all that I have attempted here.
Next: Canto CXX.: Sítá Restored.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXX.: SÍTÁ RESTORED.
Thus spoke the Self-existent Sire:
Then swiftly from the blazing pyreThe circling flames were backward rolled,And, raising in his gentle holdAlive unharmed the Maithil dame,The Lord of Fire embodied came.Fair as the morning was her sheen,And gold and gems adorned the queen.Her form in crimson robes arrayed,Her hair was bound in glossy braid.Her wreath was fresh and sweet of scent,Undimmed was every ornament.Then, standing close to Ráma'a side,The universal witness cried:'From every blot and blemish freeThy faithful queen returns to thee.In word or deed, in look or mindHer heart from thee has ne'er declined.By force the giant bore awayFrom thy lone cot his helpless prey;And in his bowers securely keptShe still has longed for thee and wept.With soft temptation, bribe and threat,He bade the dame her love forget:

But nobly faithful to her lord,
Her soul the giant's suit abhorred.Receive, O King, thy queen again,Pure, ever pure from spot and stain.'
Still stood the king in thoughtful mood
And tears of joy his eyes bedewed.Then to the best of Gods the bestOf warrior chiefs his mind expressed:
'Twas meet that mid the thousands here
The searching fire my queen should clear;For long within the giant's bowerShe dwelt the vassal of his power.For else had many a slanderous tongueReproaches on mine honour flung,And scorned the king who, love-impelled,His consort from the proof withheld.No doubt had I, but surely knewThat Janak's child was pure and true,That, come what might, in good and illHer faithful heart was with me still.I knew that Rávan could not wrongMv queen whom virtue made so strong.I knew his heart would sink and fail,Nor dare her honour to assail,As Ocean, when he raves and roars.Fears to o'erleap his bounding shores.Now to the worlds her truth is shown,

And Sítá is again mine own.
Thus proved before unnumbered eyes,On her pure fame no shadow lies.As heroes to their glory cleave,Mine own dear spouse I ne'er will leave.'
p. 500
He ceased: and clasped in fond embraceOn his dear breast she hid her face.
Next: Canto CXXI.: Das'aratha.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXXI.: DAS'ARATHA.
To him Mahes'var thus replied:
'O strong-armed hero, lotus-eyed,Thou, best of those who love the right,Hast nobly fought the wondrous fight.Dispelled by thee the doom that spreadThrough trembling earth and heaven is fled.The worlds exult in light and bliss,And praise thy name, O chief, for this.Now peace to Bharat's heart restore,And bid Kausalyá weep no more.Thy face let Queen Kaikeyí see,Let fond Sumitrá gaze on thee.The longing of thy friends relieve,The kingdom of thy sires receive.Let sons of gentle Sítá bornIkshváku's ancient line adorn.Then from all care and foemen freedPerform the offering of the steed.In pious gifts thy wealth expend,Then to the home of Gods ascend,Thy sire, this glorious king, behold.Among the blest in heaven enrolled.He comes from where the Immortals dwell:Salute him, for he loves thee well.'

His mandate Raghu's sons obeyed,
And to their sire obeisance mads,Where high he stood above the carIn wondrous light that shone afar,His limbs in radiant garments dressedWhereon no spot of dust might rest.When on the son he loved so wellThe eyes of Das'aratha fell,He strained the hero to his breastAnd thus with gentle words addressed:'No joy to me is heavenly bliss,For there these eyes my Ráma miss.Enrolled on high with saint and sage,Thy woes, dear son, my thoughts engage.Kaikeyí's guile I ne'er forget:Her cruel words will haunt me yet,Which sent thee forth, my son, to roamThe forest far from me and home.Now when I look on each dear face,And hold you both in fond embrace,My heart is full of joy to seeThe sons I love from danger free.Now know I what the Gods designed,And how in Ráma's form enshrinedThe might of Purushottam lay,The tyrant of the worlds to slay.Ah, how Kausalyá will rejoiceTo hear again her darling's voice,

And, all thy weary wanderings o'er,
To gaze upon thy face once more.
Ah blest, for ever blest are theyWhose eyes shall see the glorious dayOf thy return in joy at last,Thy term of toil and exile past.Ayodhyá's lord, begin thy reign,And day by day new glory gain,'
He ceased: and Ráma thus replied:
'Be not this grace, O sire, denied.Those hasty words, that curse revokeWhich from thy lips in anger broke:'Kaikeyí, be no longer mine:I cast thee off, both thee and thine.'O father, let no sorrow fallOn her or hers: thy curse recall.''Yea, she shall live, if so thou wilt,'The sire replied, 'absolved from guilt.'Round Lakshman then his arms he threw,And moved by love began anew:'Great store of merit shall be thine,And brightly shall thy glory shine;Secure on earth thy brother's grace.And high in heaven shall be thy place.Thy glorious king obey and fear:To him the triple world is dear.God, saint, and sage, by Indra led,

To Ráma bow the reverent head,
Nor from the Lord, the lofty-souled,Their worship or their praise withhold.Heart of the Gods, supreme is he,The One who ne'er shall cease to be.'
On Sítá then he looked and smiled;
'List to my words' he said, 'dear child,Let not thy gentle breast retainOne lingering trace of wrath or pain.When by the fire thy truth be proved,By love for thee his will was moved.The furious flame thy faith confessedWhich shrank not from the awful test:And thou, in every heart enshrined,Shalt live the best of womankind.'
He ceased: he bade the three adieu,
And home to heaven exulting flew.
Next: Canto CXXII.: Indra's Boon.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXXII.: INDRA'S BOON.
Then Indra, he whose fiery stroke
Slew furious Páka, turned and spoke:'A glorious day, O chief, is this,Rich with the fruit of lasting bliss.Well pleased are we: we love thee wellNow speak, thy secret wishes tell.'
Thus spake the sovereign of the sky,
And this was Ráma's glad reply:'If I have won your grace, inclineTo grant this one request of mine.Restore, O King: the Vánar deadWhose blood for me was nobly shed.
p. 501
To life and strength my friends recall,And bring them back from Yama's hall.When, fresh in might the warriors rise,Prepare a feast to glad their eyes.Let fruits of every season glow,And streams of purest water flow.'   Thus Raghu's son, great-hearted, prayed,

And Indra thus his answer made:
'High is the boon thou seekest: noneShould win this grace but Raghu's son.Yet, faithful to the word I spake,I grant the prayer for thy dear sake.The Vánars whom the giants slewTheir life and vigour shall renew.Their strength repaired, their gashes healedWhose torrents dyed the battle field,The warrior hosts from death shall rise *Like sleepers when their slumber flies.'   Restored from Yama's dark domainThe Vánar legions filled the plain,And, round the royal chief arrayed,With wondering hearts obeisance paid.Each God the son of Raghu praised,And cried as loud his voice he raised:'Turn, King, to fair Ayodhyá speed,And leave thy friends of Vánar breed.Thy true devoted consort cheerAfter long days of woe and fear.Bharat, thy loyal brother, see,A hermit now for love of thee.The tears of Queen Kaus'alyá dry,And light with joy each stepdame's eye;Then consecrated king of menMake glad each faithful citizen,'   They ceased: and borne on radiant carsSought their bright home amid the stars.

Next: Canto CXXIII.: The Magic Car.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXXIII.: THE MAGIC CAR.
Then slept the tamer of his foes
And spent the night in calm repose.Vibhíshan came when morning broke,And hailed the royal chief, and spoke:'Here wait thee precious oil and scents,And rich attire and ornaments.The brimming urns are newly filled,And women in their duty skilled,With lotus-eyes, thy call attend,Assistance at thy bath to lend.''Let others,' Ráma cried,'desireThese precious scents, this rich attire,I heed not such delights as these,For faithful Bharat, ill at ease,Watching for me is keeping nowFar far away his rigorous vow.By Bharat's side I long to stand,I long to see my fatherland.
Far is Ayodhvá: long, alas,
The dreary road and hard to pass.'   'One day,' Vibhíshan cried, 'one dayShall bear thee o'er that length of way.Is not the wondrous chariot mine,

Named Pushpak, wrought by hands divine.
The prize which Rávan seized of oldVictorious o'er the God of GoldThis chariot, kept with utmost care,Will waft thee through the fields of air,And thou shalt light unwearied downIn fair Ayodhyá's royal town.But yet if aught that I have doneHas pleased thee well, O Raghu's son;If still thou carest for thy friend,Some little time in Lanká spend;There after toil of battle restWithin my halls an honoured guest.'Again the son of Raghu spake:'Thy life was perilled for my sake.Thy counsel gave me priceless aid:All honours have been richly paid.Scarce can my love refuse, O bestOf giant kind, thy last request.But still I yearn once more to seeMy home and all most dear to me;Nor can I brook one hour's delay:Forgive me, speed me on my way.'   He ceased: the magic car was brought,Of yore by Vis'vakarmá wrought.In sunlike sheen it flashed and blazed;And Raghu's sons in wonder gazed.

Next: Canto CXXIV.: The Departure.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXXIV.: THE DEPARTURE.
The giant lord the chariot viewed,
And humbly thus his speech renewed:'Behold, O King, the car prepared:Now be thy further will declared.'He ceased: and Ráma spake once more:'These hosts who thronged to Lanká's shoreTheir faith and might have nobly shown,And set thee on the giants' throne.Let pearls and gems and gold repayThe feats of many a desperate day,That all may go triumphant henceProud of their noble recompense.'Vibhíshan, ready at his call,With gold and gems enriched them all.Ihen Ráma clomb the glorious carThat shone like day's resplendent star.There in his lap he held his dameVailing her eyes in modest shame.Beside him Lakshman took his stand,Whose mighty bow still armed his hand,'O King Vibhíshan,' Ráma cried,'O Vánar chiefs, so long allied,
p. 502

My comrades till the foemen fell,
List, for I speak a long farewell.The task, in doubt and fear begun,With your good aid is nobly done.Leave Lanká's shore, your steps retrace,Brave warriors of the Vánar raceThou, King Sugríva, true, through all,To friendship's bond and duty's call,Seek far Kishkindha with thy trainAnd o'er thy realm in glory reign.Farewell, Vibhíshan, Lanká's throneWon by our arms is now thine own,Thou, mighty lord, hast nought to dreadFrom heavenly Gods by Indra led.My last farewell, O King, receive,For Lanká's isle this hour I leave.'
Loud rose their cry in answer: 'We,
O Raghu's son, would go with thee.With thee delighted would we strayWhere sweet Ayodhyá's groves are gay,Then in the joyous synod viewKing-making balm thy brows bedew;Our homage to Kaus'alyá pay,And hasten on our homeward way.'
Their prayer the son of Raghu heard,
And spoke, his heart with rapture stirred:

'Sugríva, O my faithful friend,
Vibhíshan and ye chiefs, ascend.A joy beyond all joys the bestWill fill my overflowing breast,If girt by you, O noble band,I seek again my native land.'With Vánar lords in danger triedSugríva sprang to Ráma's side,And girt by chiefs of giant kindVibhíshan's step was close behind.Swift through the air, as Ráma chose,The wondrous car from earth arose.And decked with swans and silver wingsBore through the clouds its freight of kings.
Next: Canto CXXV.: The Return.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXXV.: THE RETURN.
Then Ráma, speeding through the skies,
Bent on the earth his eager eyes:'Look, Sítá, see, divinely plannedAnd built by Vis'vakarmá's hand,Lanká the lovely city restEnthroned on Mount Trikúta's crestBehold those fields, ensanguined yet,Where Vánar hosts and giants met.There, vainly screened by charm and spell,The robber Rávan fought and fell.There knelt Mandodari  
1 and shed
Her tears in floods for Rávan dead.And every dame who loved him sent
From her sad heart her wild lament.
There gleams the margin of the deep,Where, worn with toil, we sank to sleep.Look, love, the unconquered sea behold,King Varun's home ordained of old,Whose boundless waters roar and swellRich with their store of pearl and shell.O see, the morning sun is brightOn fair Hiranyanábha's  
1b height,

Who rose from Ocean's sheltering breast
That Hanumán might stay and rest.There stretches, famed for evermore,The wondrous bridge from shore to shore.The worlds, to life's remotest day.Due reverence to the work shall pay,Which holier for the laps of timeShall give release from sin and crime.Now thither bend, dear love, thine eyesWhere green with groves Kishkindhá lies,The seat of King Sugríva's reign,Where Báli by this hand was slain.  
2b
There Ríshyamúka's hill beholdBright gleaming with embedded gold.There too my wandering foot I set,There King Sugríva first I met.And, where yon trees their branches wave,My promise of assistance gave.There, flushed with lilies, Pampá shinesWith banks which greenest foliage lines,Where melancholy steps I bentAnd mourned thee with a mad lament.There fierce Kabandha, spreading wideHis giant arms, in battle died.Turn, Sítá, turn thine eyes and seeIn Janasthán that glorious tree:There Rávan, lord of giants slewOur friend Jatáyas brave and true,Thy champion in the hopless* strife,

Who gave for thee his noble life.
Now mark that glade amid the treesWhere once we lived as devotees.See, see our leafy cot betweenThose waving boughs of densest green,Where Rávan seized his prize and stoleMy love the darling of my soul.O, look again: beneath thee gleamsGodávari the best of streams,Whose lucid waters sweetly glideBy lilies that adorn her side.There dwelt Agastya, holy sage,In plantain-sheltered hermitage.See S'arabhanga's humble shed
p. 503
Which sovereign Indra visited.See where the gentle hermits dwellNeath Atri's rule who loved us well;Where once thine eyes were blest to seeHis sainted dame who talked with thee.Now rest thine eyes with new delightOn Chitrakúta's woody height,See Jumna flashing in the sunThrough groves of brilliant foliage run.Screened by the shade of spreading boughsThere Bharadvája keeps his vows,There Gangá, river of the skies,

Bolls the sweet wave that purifies,
There S'ringavera's towers ascendWhere Guha reigns, mine ancient friend.I see, I see thy glittering spires,Ayodhyá, city of my sires.Bow down, bow down thy head, my sweet,Our home, our long-lost home to greet.'
Footnotes
502:1 Ravan's queen.
502:1b Or Maináka.
502:2b Here, in the North-west recension, Sítá 
expresses a wish that Tará and the wives of the Vánar 
chiefs should be invited to accompany her to Ajodhyá. The car descends, and the Vánar matrons are added to the party. The Bengal recension ignores this palpable interruption.
Next: Canto CXXVI.: Bharat Consoled.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXXVI.: BHARAT CONSOLED.
But Ráma bade the chariot stay,
And halting in his airy way,In Bharadvá's holy shadeHis homage to the hermit paid.'O saint,' he cried, 'I yearn to knowMy dear Ayodhyá's weal and woe.O tell me that the people thrive,And that the queens are yet alive.'   Joy gleamed in Bhardvája's eye,Who gently smiled and made reply:'Thy brother, studious of thy will,Is faithful and obedient still.In tangled twine he coils his hair:Thy safe return is all his care.Before thy shoes he humbly bends,And to thy house and realm attends.When first these dreary years began,When first I saw the banished man,With Sitá, in his hermit coat,At this sad heart compassion smote.My breast with tender pity swelled:I saw thee from thy home expelled,Reft of all princely state, forlorn,A hapless wanderer travel-worn,

Firm in thy purpose to fulfil
Thy duty and thy father's will.But boundless is my rapture now:Triumphant, girt with friends, art thou.Where'er thy wandering steps have been,Thy joy and woe mine eyes have seen.Thy glorious deeds to me art known,The Bráhmans saved, the foes o'erthrown.Such power have countless seasons spentIn penance and devotion lent.Thy virtues, best of chiefs, I know,And now a boon would fain bestow.This hospitable gift  
1 receive:
Then with the dawn my dwelling leave.'The bended head of Ráma showedHis reverence for the grace bestowed;Then for each brave companion's sakeHe sought a further boon and spake:   'O let that mighty power of thineThe road to fair Ayodhyá lineWith trees where fruit of every hueThe Vánars' eye and taste may woo,And flowers of every season, sweetWith stores of honeyed juice, may meet,'The hero ceased: the hermit bentHis reverend head in glad assent;And swift, as Bharadvája willed,The prayer of Ráma was fulfilled.For many a league the lengthening road

Trees thick with fruit and blossom showed
With luscious beauty to enticeThe taste like trees of Paradise.The Vánars passed beneath the shadeOf that delightful colonnade,Still tasting with unbounded gleeThe treasures of each wondrous tree.
Next: Canto CXXVII.: Ráma's Message.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXXVII.: RÁMA'S MESSAGE.
But Ráma, when he first looked down
And saw afar Ayodhyá's town,Had called Hanumán to his side,The chief on whom his heart relied,And said: 'Brave Vánar, good at need,Haste onward, to Ayodhyá speed,And learn, I pray, if all be wellWith those who in the palace dwell.But an thou speedest on thy wayAwhile at S'ringavera stay.Tell Guha the Nishádas' lord,That victor, with my queen restored,In health and strength with many a friendHomeward again my steps I bendThence by the road that he will showOn to Avodhyá swiftly go.There with my love my brother greet,And all our wondrous tale repeat.Say that victorious in the strifeI come with Lakshman and my wife,Then mark with keenest eye each traceOf joy or grief on Bharat's face.Be all his gestures closely viewed,

p. 504
Each change of look and attitude.
Where breathes the man who will not clingTo all that glorifies a king?Where beats the heart that can resignAn ancient kingdom, nor repineTo lose a land renowned for breedsOf elephants and warrior steeds?If, won by custom day by day,My brother Bharat thirsts for sway,Still let him rule the nations, stillThe throne of old Ikshváku fill.Go, mark him well: his feelings learn,And, ere we yet be near return.'   He ceased: and, garbed in human form,Forth sped Hanumán swift as storm.Sublime in air he rose, and throughThe region of his father flew.He saw far far beneath his feetWhere Gangá's flood and Jumna meet.Descending from the upper airHe entered S'ringavera, whereKing Guha's heart was well contentTo hear the message Ráma sent.Then, with his mighty strengtn renewed,The Vánar chief big way pursued,Válúkiní was far behind,And Gomatí with forests lined,

And golden fields and pastures gay
With flocks and herds beneath him lay.Then Nandigráma charmed his eyeWhere flowers were bright with every dye,And trees of lovely foliage madeWith meeting boughs delightful shade,Where women watched in trim arrayTheir little sons' and grandsons' play.His eager eye on Bharat fellWho sat before his lonely cell.In hermit weed, with tangled hair,Pale, weak, and worn with ceaseless care.His royal pomp and state resignedFor Ráma still he watched and pined,Still to his dreary vows adhered,And royal Ráma's shoes revered.Yet still the terror of his armPreserved the land from fear and harm.   The Wind-God's son, in form a man,Raised reverent hands and thus began:'Fond greeting, Prince, I bring to thee,And Ráma's self has sent it: heFor whom thy spirit sorrows yetAs for a hapless anchoretIn Dandak wood, in dire distress,With matted hair and hermit dress.This sorrow from thy bosom fling,And hear the tale of joy I bring.This day thy brother shalt thou meet

Exulting in his foe's defeat,
Freed from his toil and lengthened vow,The light of victory on his brow,With Sítá, Lakshman and his friendsHomeward at last his steps he bends.'   Then joy, too mighty for control,Rushed in full flood o'er Bharat's soul;His reeling sense and strength gave way,And fainting on the earth he lay,At length upspringing from the ground,His arms about Hanumán wound,With tender tears of rapture sprung,He dewed the neck to which he clung:'Art thou a God or man,' he cried,'Whom love and pity hither guide?For this a hundred thousand kine,A hundred villages be thine.A score of maids of spotless livesTo thee I give to be thy wives,Of golden hue and bright of face,Each lovely for her tender grace.'   He ceased a while by joy subdued,And then his eager speech renewed;
Footnotes
503:1 The arghya, a respectful offering to Gods and 

venerable men consisting of rice, dúivá grass, flowers 
etc, with water.
Next: Canto CXXVIII.: Hanumán's Story.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXXVIII.: HANUMÁN'S STORY.
'In doubt and fear long years have passed
And glorious tidings come at last.True, true is now the ancient verseWhich men in time of bliss rehearse:Once only in a hundred yearsGreat joy to mortal men appears.But now his woes and triumph tell,And loss and gain as each befell.'He ceased: Hanumán mighty-souledThe tale of Ráma's wanderings toldFrom that first day on which he stoodIn the drear shade of Dandak wood.He told how fierce Virádha fell;He told of S'arabhanga's cellWhere Ráma saw with wondering eyesIndra descended from the skies.He told how Súrpanukhi came,Her soul aglow with amorous flame,And fled repulsed, with rage and tears,Reft of her nose and severed ears.He told how Ráma's might subduedThe giants' furious multitude;How Khara with the troops he ledAnd Tris'iras and Dúshan bled:

How Ráma, tempted from his cot,
The golden deer pursued and shot,And Rávan came and stole awayThe Maithil queen his hapless prey,When, as he fought, the dame to save,His noble life Jatáyus gave:How Ráma still the the search renewed,The robber to his hold pursued,Bridging the sea from shore to shore,And found his queen to part no more.  
1
p. 505
Footnotes
504:1 I have abridged Hanuman's outline of Ráma's 
adventures, with the details of which we are already 
sufficiently acquainted.
Next: Canto CXXIX.: The Meeting With Bharat.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXXIX.: THE MEETING WITH 
BHARAT.
O'erwhelmed with rapture Bharat heard
The tale that all his being stirred,And, heralding the glad event,This order to Satrughna sent:'Let every shrine with flowers be gayLet incense burn and music play.Go forth, go forth to meet your king,Let tabours sound and minstrels sing,Let bards swell high the note of praiseSkilled in the lore of ancient days.Call forth the royal matrons: callEach noble from the council hall.Send all we love and honour most,Send Bráhmans and the warrior host,A glorious company to bringIn triumph home our lord the king.'   Great rapture filled S'atrughna's breast,Obedient to his brother's hest.'Send forth ten thousand men' he cried,'Let brawny arms be stoutly plied,And, smoothing all with skilful care,The road for Kosal's king prepare.

Then o'er the earth let thousands throw
Fresh showers of water cool as snow,And others strew with garlands gayWith loveliest blooms our monarch's way.On tower and temple porch and gateLet banners wave in royal state.And be each roof and terrace linedWith blossoms loose and chaplets twined.'   The nobles hasting forth fulfilledHis order as S'atrughna willed.Sublime on elephants they rodeWhose gilded girths with jewels glowed.Attended close by thousands moreGay with the gear and flags they bore.A thousand chiefs their steeds bestrode,Their glittering cars a thousand showed.And countless hosts in rich arrayPursued on foot their eager way.Veiled from the air with silken screensIn litters rode the widowed queens.Kausalyá first, acknowledged headAnd sovereign of the household, led:Sumitrá next, and after, damesOf lower rank and humbler names.Then compassed by a white-robed throngOf Bráhmans, heralded with song,With shouts of joy from countless throats,And shells' and tambours' mingled notes,And drums resounding long and loud,

Exulting Bharat joined the crowd.
Still on his head, well-trained in loreOf duty, Ráma's shoes he bore.The moon-white canopy was spreadWith flowery twine engarlanded
And jewelled chouries, meet to hold
O'er Ráma's brow, shone bright with gold,Though Nandigráma's town they neared,Of Ráma yet no sign appeared.Then Bharat called the Vánar chiefAnd questioned thus in doubt and grief:'Hast thou uncertain, like thy kind,A sweet delusive guile designed?Where, where is royal Ráma? showThe hero, victor of the foe.I gaze, but see no Vánars stillWho wear each varied shape at will.'   In eager love thus Bharat cried,And thus the Wind-God's son replied:'Look, Bharat, on those laden treesThat murmur with the song of bees;For Ráma's sake the saint has madeUntimely fruits, unwonted shade.Such power in ages long agoCould Indra's gracious boon bestow.O, hear the Vánars' voices, hearThe shouting which proclaims them nearE'en now about to cross they seem

Sweet Gomati's delightful stream.
I see, I see the car designedBy Brahmá's own creative mind,The car which, radiant as the moon,Moves at the will by Brahmá's boon;The car which once was Rávan's pride,The victor's spoil when Rávan died.Look, there are Raghu's sons: betweenThe brothers stands the rescued queen.There is Vibhíshan full in view,Sugríva and his retinue.'   He ceased: then rapture loosed each tongue:From men and dames, from old and young,One long, one universal cry,'Tis he,'tis Ráma, smote the sky.All lighted down with eager speedFrom elephant and car and steed,And every joyful eye intentOn Ráma's moonbright face was bent.Entranced a moment Bharat gazed:Then reverential hands he raised,And on his brother humbly pressedThe honours due to welcome guest.Then Bharat clomb the car to greetHis king and bowed him at his feet,Till Ráma raised him face to faceAnd held him in a close embrace.Then Lakshman and the Maithil dameHe greeted as he spoke his name  
1

He greeted next, supreme in place,
The sovereign of the Vánar race,And Jámbaván and Báli's son,
p. 506
And lords and chiefs, omitting none. 1
Sugríva to his heart he pressedAnd thus with grateful words addressed:'Four brothers, Vánar king, were we,And now we boast a fifth in thee.By kindly acts a friend we know:Offence and wrong proclaim the foe,'To King Vibhíshan then he spake:'Well hast thou fought fov Ráma's sake.'Nor was the brave S'atrughna slowHis reverential love to showTo both his brothers, as was meet,And venerate the lady's feet.Then Ráma to his mother came,Saw her pale cheek and wasted frame,With gentle words her heart consoled,And clasped her feet with loving hold.Then at Sumitra's feet he bent,And fair Kaikeyi's, reverent,Greeted each dame from chief to least,And bowed him to the household priest.Up rose a shout from all the throng:'O welcome, Ráma, mourned so long.

Welcome, Kausalyá's joy and pride,'
Ten hundred thousand voices cried.Then Bharat placed, in duty taught,On Ráma's feet the shoes he brought:'My King,' he cried, 'receive againThe pledge preserved through years of pain,The rule and lordship of the landEntrusted to my weaker hand.No more I sigh o'er sorrows past,My birth and life are blest at lastIn the glad sight this day has shown,When Ráma comes to rule his own.'   He ceased: the faithful love that movedThe prince's soul each heart approved;Nor could the Vánar chiefs refrainFrom tender tears that fell like rain.Then Ráma, stirred with joy anew,His arms about his brother threw,And to the grove his course he bentWhere Bharat's hermit days were spent.Alighting in that pure retreatHe pressed the earth with eager feet.Then, at his hest, the car rose highAnd sailing through the northern skySped homeward to the Lord of GoldWho owned the wondrous prize of old.  
2

Footnotes
505:1 In these respectful salutations the person who 
salutes his superior mentions his own name even when 
it is well known to the person whom he salutes.
506:1 I have omitted the chieftains' names as they could 
not be introduced without padding. They are Mainda, 
Dwivid, Níla Rishabh, Sushen, Nala, Gaváksha, Gandhamádan, S'arabh, and Panas.
506:2 The following addition is found in the Bengal 
recension: But Vais'ravan (Kuvera) when he beheld his 
chariot said unto it: 'Go, and carry Ráma, and come unto me when my thought shall call thee, And the chariot returned unto Ráma:' and he honoured it when he had heard what had passed.
Next: Canto CXXX.: The Consecration.

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
CANTO CXXX.: THE CONSECRATION.
Then, reverent hand to hand applied,
Thus Bharat to his brother cried:'Thy realm, O King, is now restored,Uninjured to the rightful lord.This feeble arm with toil and pain,The weighty charge could scarce sustain.And the great burthen wellnigh brokeThe neck untrained to bear the yoke.The royal swan outspeeds the crow:The steed is swift, the mule is slow,Nor can my feeble feet be ledO'er the rough ways where thine should tread.Now grant what all thy subjects ask:Begin, O King, thy royal task.Now let our longing eyes beholdThe glorious rite ordained of old,And on the new-found monarch's headLet consecrating drops be shed.'   He ceased: victorious Ráma bentHis head in token of assent.He sat, and tonsors trimmed with careHis tangles of neglected hairThen, duly bathed, the hero shoneWith all his splendid raiment on.

And Sitá with the matrons' aid
Her limbs in shining robes arrayed,Sumantra then, the charioteer,Drew, ordered by S'atrughnu near,And stayed within the hermit groveThe chariot and the steeds he drove.Therein Sugríva's consorts, gracedWith gems, and Ráma's queen were placed,All fain Ayodhyá to behold:And swift away the chariot rolled.Like Indra Lord of Thousand Eyes,Drawn by fleet lions through the skies,Thus radiant in his glory showedKing Ráma as he homeward rode,In power and might unparalleled.The reins the hand of Bharat held.Above the peerless victor's headThe snow-white shade S'atrughna spread,And Lakshman's ever-ready handHis forehead with a chourie fanned.Vibhishan close to Lakshman's sideSharing his task a chourie plied.Sugríva on S'atrunjay came,An elephant of hugest frame:Nine thousand others bore, behind,The chieftains of the Vánar kindAll gay, in forms of human mould,With rich attire and gems and gold.

p. 507
Thus borne along in royal state
King Rama reached Ayodhya's gateWith merry noise of shells and drumsAnd joyful shouts, He comes, he comes,A Brahman host with solemn tread,And kine the long procession led,And happy maids in ordered bandsThrew grain and gold with liberal hands.Neath gorgeous flags that waved in rowsOn towers and roofs and porticoes.Mid merry crowds who sang and cheeredThe palace of the king they neared.Then Raghu's son to Bharat, bestOf duty's slaves, these words addressed:'Pass onward to the monarch's hall.The high-souled Vánars with thee call,And let the chieftains, as is meet,The widows of our father greet.And to the Vánar king assignThose chambers, best of all, which shineWith lazulite and pearl inlaid,And pleasant grounds with flowers and shade,'He ceased: and Bharat bent his head;Sugriva by the hand he ledAnd passed within the palace whereStood couches which S'atrughna's care,With robes and hangings richly dyed,

And burning lamps, had seen supplied.
Then Bharat spake: 'I pray thee, friend,Thy speedy messengers to send,Each sacred requisite to bringThat we may consecrate our king.'Sugriva raised four urns of gold,The water for the rite to hold,And bade four swiftest Vánars fleeAnd fill them from each distant sea.Then east and west and south and northThe Vánar envoys hastened forth.Each in swift flight an ocean soughtAnd back through air his treasure brought,And full five hundred floods besidePure water for the king supplied.Then girt by many a Bráhman sage,Vasishtha, chief for reverend age,High in a throne with jewels gracedKing Ráma and his Sitá placed.There by Jábáli, far revered,Vijay and Kasyap's son appeared;By Gautam's side Kátváyan stood,And Vámadeva wise and good,Whose holy hands in order shedThe pure sweet drops on Ráma's head.Then priests and maids and warriors, allApproaching at Vasishtha's call,With sacred drops bedewed their king,The centre of a joyous ring,

The guardians of the worlds, on high,
And all the children of the skyFrom herbs wherewith their hands were filledBare juices on his brow distilled.His brows were bound with glistering goldWhich Manu's self had worn of old,Bright with the flash of many a gem.His sire's ancestral diadem.Satrughna lent his willing aidAnd o'er him held the regal shade:The monarchs whom his arm had savedThe chouries round his forehead waved.A golden chain, that flashed and glowedWith gems the God of Wind bestowed:Mahendra gave a glorious stringOf fairest pearls to deck the king,The skies with acclamation rang,The gay nymphs danced, the minstrels sang.On that blest day the joyful plainWas clothed anew with golden grain.The trees the witching influence knew,And bent with fruits of loveliest hue,And Rama's consecration lentNew sweetness to each flowret's scent.The monarch, joy of Raghu's line,Gave largess to the Bráhmans, kineAnd steeds unnumbered, wealth untoldOf robes and pearls and gems and gold.A jewelled chain, whose lustre passed

The glory of the sun, he cast
About his friend Sugriva's neck;And, Angad Báli's son to deck,He gave a pair of armlets brightWith diamond and lazulite.A string of pearls of matchless hueWhich gleams like tender moonlight threwAdorned with gems of brightest sheen,He gave to grace his darling queen.The offering from his hand receivedA moment on her bosom heaved;Then from her neck the chain she drew,A glance on all the Vánars threw,And wistful eyes on Ráma bentAs still she held the ornament.Her wish he knew, and made replyTo that mute question of her eye:'Yea. love; the chain on him bestowWhose wisdom truth and might we know,The firm ally, the faithful friendThrough toil and peril to the end,   Then on Hanúmán's bosom hungThe chain which Sitá's hand had flung:So may a cloud, when winds are stillWith moon-lit silver gird a hill.   To every Vánar Ráma gaveRich treasures from the mine and wave.And with their honours well contentHomeward their steps the chieftains bent.

Ten thousand years Ayodhyá, blest
With Ráma's rule, had peace and rest.No widow mourned her murdered mate,No house was ever desolate.The happy land no murrain knew,The flocks and herds increased and grew.
p. 508
The earth her kindly fruits supplied,No harvest failed, no children died.Unknown were want, disease, and crime:So calm, so happy was the time.  
1
Footnotes
508:1 Here follows in the original an enumeration of the 
chief blessings which will attend the man or woman 
who reads or hears read this tale of Ráma. These blessings are briefly mentioned at the end of the first Canto of the first book, and it appears unnecessary to repeat them here in their amplified form. The Bengal recension (Gorresio's edition) gives them more concisely as follows: 'This is the great first poem blessed and glorious, which gives long life to men and victory to kings, the poem which Válmíki made. He 

who listens to this wondrous tale of Ráma unwearied in 
action shall be absolved from all his sins. By listening to the deeds of Ráma he who wishes for sons shall obtain, his heart's desire, and to him who longs for riches shall riches be given. The virgin who asks for a husband shall obtain a husband suited to her mind, and shall meet again her dear kinsfolk who are far away. They who hear this poem which Válmíki made shall obtain all their desires and all their prayers shall be fulfilled.'
Next: Appendices

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
p. 509 
RAVAN DOOMED. 
SECTION XIII. Afterwards Rishya-shringa said again to the King "I 
will perform another sacrificial act to secure thee a son." Then the son of Vibhanduka, of subdued passions, seeking the happiness of the king, proceeded to perform the sacrifice for the accomplishment of his wishes. Hither were previously collected the gods, with the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and the sages, for the sake of receiving their respective shares, Brahma too, the sovereign of the gods, with Sthanoo, and Narayana, chief of beings and the four supporters of the universe, and the divine,mothers of all the celestials, met together there. To the Ushwa-medha, the great sacrifice of the magnanimous monarch, came also Indra the glorious one, surrounded by the Muroots. Rishya-shringi then supplicated the gods assembled for their share of the sacrifice (saying), "This devout king Dusha-rutha, who, through the desire of offspring, confiding in you, has performed sacred austerities, and who has offered to you the sacrifice called Ushwa-medha, is about to perform, another sacrifice for the sake of obtaining 

sons. To him thus desirous of offspring be pleased to 
grant the blessing: I supplicate you all with joined hands. May he have four sons, renowned through the universe." The gods replied to the sage's son supplicating with joined hands, "Be it so: thou, O brahman, art ever to be regarded by us, as the king is in a peculiar manner. The lord of men by this sacrifice shall obtain the great object of his desires. Having thus said, the gods preceded by Indra, disappeared. 
They all then having seen that (sacrifice) performed by 
the great sage according to the ordinance went to Prajapati the lord of mankind, and with joined hands addressed Bráhma the giver of blessings, "O Brháma, the Rakshas Ravana by name, to whom a blessing was awarded by thee, through pride troubleth all of us the gods, and even the great sages, who perpetually practise sacred austerities. We, O glorious one, regarding the promise formerly granted by thy kindness that he should be invulnerable to the gods, the Danuvas and the Yukshas have born (sic) all, (his oppression); this lord of Rakshases therefore distresses the universe; and, inflated by this promise unjustly vexes the divine sages, the Yukshas, and Gandhavras, the Usooras, and men: where Ravana remains there the sun loses his force, the winds through fear of him do not blow, the fire ceases to burn; the rolling ocean, seeing him, ceases to move its waves. Vishruvna, distressed by his power, has abandoned Lanka and fled. O divine one save us from 

Ravana, who fills the world with noise and tumult. O 
giver of desired things, be pleased to contrive a way for his destruction." 
Bruhma thus informed by the devas, reflecting, replied, 
Oh! I have devised the method for slaying this outrageous tyrant. Upon his requesting, "May I be invulnerable to the divine sages, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas 
p. 510 
and the serpents," I replied "Be it so."This Rakshus, through contempt, said nothing respecting man; therefore this wicked one shall be destroyed by man. The gods, preceded by Shukra, hearing these words spoken by Bruhmá, were filled with joy. 
At this time Vishnoo the glorious, the lord of the world, 
arrayed in yellow, with hand ornaments of glowing gold, riding on Vinuteya, as the sun on a cloud, arrived with his conch, his discus, and his club in his hand. Being adored by the excellent celestials, and welcomed by Bruhma, he drew near and stood before him. All the gods then addressed Vishnoo, "O Mudhoo-sooduna, thou art able to abolish the distress of the distressed. We intreat thee, be our sanctuary, 0 Uchyoota." Vishnoo replied, "Say, what shall I do?" The celestials hearing these his words added further. "The virtuous, the 

encourager of excellence, eminent for truth, the firm 
observer of his vows, being childless, is performing an Ushwamedha for the purpose of obtaining offspring. For the sake of the good of the universe, we intreat thee, O Vishnoo, to become his son. Dividing thyself into four parts, in the wombs of his three consorts equal to Huri, Shree, and Keertee, assume the sonship of king Dusha-rutha, the lord of Uyodhya, eminent in the knowledge of duty, generous and illustrious, as the great sages. Thus becoming man, O Vishnoo, conquer in battle Ravuna, the terror of the universe, who is invulnerable to the gods. This ignorant Rakshus Ravuna, by the exertion of his power, afflicts the gods, the Gundhurvas, the Siddhas, and the most excellent sages; these sages, the Gundhurvas, and the Upsaras, sporting in the forest Nunduna have been destroyed by that furious one. We, with the sages, are come to thee seeking his destruction. The Siddhas, the Gundhurvas, and the Yakshas betake themselves to thee, thou art our only refuge; O Deva, afflicter of enemies, regard the world of men, and destroy the enemy of the gods." 
Vishnoo, the sovereign of the gods, the chief of the 
celestials, adored by all beings, being thus supplicated, replied to all the assembled gods (standing) before Bruhma, "Abandon fear; peace be with you; for your benefit having killed Ravuna the cruel, destructively active, the cause of fear to the divine sages, together with all his posterity, his courtiers and counsellors, and 

his relations, and friends, protecting the earth, I will 
remain incarnate among men for the space of eleven thousand years." 
Having given this promise to the gods, the divine 
Vishnoo, ardent in the work, sought a birth-place among men. Dividing himself into four parts, he whose eyes resemble the lotos and the pulasa, the lotos petal-eyed, chose for his father Dusha-ratha the sovereign of men. The divine sages then with the Gundhurvas, the Roodras, and the (different sorts of) Upsaras, in the most excellent strains, praised the destroyer of Mudhoo, (saying) "Root up Ravuna, of fervid energy, the devastator, the enemy of Indra swollen with pride. Destroy him, who causes universal lamentation, the annoyer of the holy ascetics, terrible, the terror of the devout Tupuswees. Having destroyed Ravuna, tremendously powerful, who causes universal weeping, together with his army and friends, dismissing all sorrow, return to heaven, the place free from stain and sin, and protected by the sovereign of the celestial powers." 
Thus far the Section, containing the plan for the death 
of Ravuna. 
                                            CAREY AND 
MARSHMAN. 

The Rámáyan ends, epically complete, with the 
triumphant return of Ráma and his rescued queen to Ayodhyá and his consecration and coronation in the capital of his forefathers. Even if the story were not complete, the conclusion of the last Canto of the sixth Book, evidently the work of a later hand than Válmíki's, which speaks of Ráma's glorious and happy reign and promises blessings to those who read and hear the Rámáyan, would be sufficient to show that, when these verses were added, the poem was considered to be finished. The Uttarakánda or Last Book is merely an appendix or a supplement and relates only events antecedent and subsequent to those described in the original poem. Indian scholars however, led by reverential love of tradition, unanimously ascribe this Last Book to Válmíki, and regard it as part of the Ráamáyan. 
Signor Gorresio has published an excellent translation 
of the Uttarakánda, in Italian prose, from the recension current in Bengal; 
1 and Mr. Muir has epitomized a 
portion of the book in the Appendix to the Fourth Part of his Sanskrit Texts (1862). From these scholars I borrow freely in the following pages, and give them my hearty thanks for saving me much wearisome labour. 
p. 517 
"After Ráma had returned to Ayodhyá and taken 

possession of the throne, the rishis [saints} assembled to 
greet him, and Ágastya, in answer to his questions recounted many particulars regarding his old enemies. In the Krita Yuga (or Golden Age) the austere and pious Brahman rishi Pulastya, a son of Brahmá, being teased with the visits of different damsels, proclaimed that any one of them whom he again saw near his hermitage should become pregnant. This had not been heard by the daughter of the royal rishi Trinavindu, who one day came into Pulastya's neighbourhood, and her pregnancy was the result (Sect. 2, vv. 14 ff.). After her return home, her father, seeing her condition, took her to Pulastya, who accepted her as his wife, and she bore a son who received the name of Vis'ravas. This son was, like his father, an austere and religious sage. He married the daughter of the muni Bharadvája, who bore him a son to whom Brahmá gave the name of Vais'ravan--Kuvera (Sect. 3, vv. I ff). He performed austerities for thousands of years, when he obtained from Brahmá as a boon that he should be one of the guardians of the world (along with Indra, Varuna, and Yáma) and the god of riches. He afterwards consulted his father Vis'ravas about an abode, and at his suggestion took possession of the city of Lanká, which had formerly been built by Vis'vakarman for the Ráxasas, but had been abandoned by them through fear of Vishnu, and was at that time unoccupied. Ráma then (Sect. 4) says he is surprised to hear that Lanká had formerly belonged to the Ráxasas, as he had always understood that they were the 

descendants of Pulastya, and now he learns that they 
had also another origin. He therefore asks who was their ancestor, and what fault they had committed that they were chased away by Vishnu. Àgastya replies that when Brahmá created the waters, he formed certain beings,--some of whom received the name of Ráxasas,--to guard them. The first Ráxasa kings were Heti and Praheti. Heti married a sister of Kála (Time). She bore him a son Vidyutkes'a, who in his turn took for his wife Lankatankatá, the daughter of Sandhyá (V. 21). She bore him a son Sukes'a, whom she abandoned, but he was seen by S'iva as he was passing by with his wife Párvatí, who made the child as old as his mother, and immortal, and gave him a celestial city. Sukes'a married a Gandharví called Devavatí who bore three sons, Mályavat, Sumáli and Máli. These sons practised intense austerities, when Brahmá appeared and conferred on them invincibility and long life. They then harassed the gods. Vis'vakarman gave them a city, Lanká, on the mountain Trikúta, on the shore of 
p. 518 
the southern ocean, which he had built at the command of Indra....The three Ráxasas, Mályavat and his two brothers, then began to oppress the gods, rishis, etc.; who (Sect. 6, v.1 ff.) in consequence resort for aid to Mahádeva, who having regard to his protégé Sukes'a the father of Mályavat, says that he cannot kill the Ráxasas. 

but advises the suppliants [*supplicants?*} to go to 
Vishnu, which they do, and receive from him a promise that he will destroy their enemies. The three Ráxasa kings, hearing of this, consult together, and proceed to heaven to attack the gods. Vishnu prepares to meet them. The battle is described in the seventh section. The Ráxasas are defeated by Vishnu with great slaughter, and driven back to Lanká, one of their leaders, Máli, being slain. Mályavat remonstrates with. Vishnu, who was assaulting the rear of the fugitives, for his unwarrior-like conduct, and wishes to renew the combat (Sect. 8, v. 3 ff.). Vishnu replies that he must fulfil his promise to the gods by slaying the Ráxasas, and that he would destroy them even if they fled to Pátála. These Ráxasas, Agastya says, were more powerful than Rávana, and, could only be destroyed by Náráyana, i.e. by Ráma himself, the eternal, indestructible god. Sumáli with his family lived for along time in Pátála, while Kuvera dwelt in Lanká. In section 9 it is related that Sumáli once happened to visit the earth, when he observed Kuvera going in his chariot to see his father Vis'ravas. This leads him to consider how he might restore his own fortunes. He consequently desires his daughter Kaikasí to go and woo Vis'ravas, who receives her graciously. She becomes the mother of the dreadful Rávana, of the huge Kumbhakarna, of Súrpanakhá, and of the righteous Vibhíshana, who was the last son. These children grow up in the forest. Kumbhakarna goes about eating rishis. Kuvera comes to visit his 

father, when Kaikasí takes occasion to urge her son 
Rávana to strive to become like his brother (Kuvera) in splendour. This Rávana promises to do. He then goes to the hermitage of Gokarna with his brothers to perform austerity. In section 10 their austere observances are described: after a thousand years' penance Rávana throws his head into the fire. He repeats this oblation nine times after equal intervals, and is about to do it the tenth time, when Brahmá appears, and offers a boon. Rávana asks immortality, but is refused. He then asks that he may be indestructible by all creatures more powerful than men; which boon is accorded by Brahmá together with the recovery of all the heads he had sacrificed and the power of assuming any shape he pleased. Vibhíshana asks as his boon that "even amid the greatest calamities he may think only of righteousness, and that the weapon of Brahmá may appear to him unlearnt, etc. The god grants his request, and adds the gift of immortality. When Brahmá is about to offer a boon to Kumbhakarna, the gods interpose, as, they say, he had eaten seven Apsarases and ten followers of Indra, besides rishis and men; and beg that under the guise of a boon stupefaction may be inflicted on him. Brahmá thinks on Sarasvatí, who arrives and, by Brahmá's command, enters into Kumbhakarna's mouth that she may speak for him. Under this influence he asks that he may receive the boon of sleeping for many years, which is granted. When however Sarasvatí has left him, and he recovers his own consciousness, he 

perceives that he has been deluded. Kuvera by his 
father's advice, gives up the city of Lanká to Rávana." 1 
Rávana marries (Sect. 12,) Mandodarí the beautiful daughter of the Asur Maya whose 
p. 519 
name has several times occurred in the Rámáyan as that of an artist of wonderful skill. She bears a son Meghanáda or the Roaring Cloud who was afterwards named Indrajit from his victory over the sovereign of the skies. The conquest of Kuvera, and the acquisition of the magic self-moving chariot which has done much service in the Rámáyan, form the subject of sections XIII., XIV. and XV. "The rather pretty story of Vedavatí is related in the seventeenth section, as follows: Rávana in the course of his progress through the world, comes to the forest on the Himálaya, where he sees a damsel of brilliant beauty, but in ascetic garb, of whom he straightway becomes enamoured. He tells her that such an austere life is unsuited to her youth and attractions, and asks who she is and why she is leading an ascetic existence. She answers that she is called Vedavatí, and is the vocal daughter of Vrihaspati's son, the rishi Kus'adhvája, sprung from him during his constant study of the Veda. The gods, gandharvas, etc., she says, wished that she should choose a husband, but her father would give her to no one else than to Vishnu, the lord of the world, whom he desired for his son-in-

law. Vedavati then proceeds: "In order that I may fulfil 
this desire of my father in respect of Náráyana, I wed him with my heart. Having entered into this engagement I practise great austerity. Náráyana and no other than he, Purushottama, is my husband. From the desire of obtaining him, I resort to this severe observance. Rávana's passion is not in the least diminished by this explanation and he urges that it is the old alone who should seek to become distinguished by accumulating merit through austerity, prays that she who is so young and beautiful shall become his bride; and boasts that he is superior to Vishnu. She rejoins that no one but be would thus contemn that deity. On receiving this reply he touches the hair of her head with the tip of his finger. She is greatly incensed, and forthwith cuts off her hair and tells him that as he has so insulted her, she cannot continue to live, but will enter into the fire before his eyes. She goes on "Since I have been insulted in the forest by thee who art wicked-hearted, I shall be born again for thy destruction. For a man of evil desire cannot be slain by a woman; and the merit of my austerity would be lost if I were to launch a curse against thee. But if I have performed or bestowed or sacrificed aught may I be born the virtuous daughter, not produced from the womb, of a righteous man." Having thus spoken she entered, the blazing fire. Then a shower of celestial flowers fell (from every part of the sky). It is she, lord, who, having been Vedavatí in the Krita age, has been born (in the Treta age) as the 

daughter of the king of the Janakas, and (has become) 
thy [Ráma's] bride; for thou art the eternal Vishnu. The mountain-like enemy who was [virtually] destroyed before by her wrath, has now been slain by her having recourse to thy superhuman energy." On this the commentator remarks: "By this it is signified that Sítá was the principal cause of Rávana's death; but the function of destroying him is ascribed to Ráma." On the words,"thou art Vishnu," in the preceding verse the same commentator remarks: "By this it is clearly affirmed that Sítá was Laxmí. This is what Parás'ara says: "In the god's life as Ráma, she became Sítá, and in his birth as Krishna [she became] Rukminí." 
1 
In the following section (XVIII.) "Rávana is described as violently interrupting a sacrifice which is being performed by king Marutta, and the assembled 
p. 520 
gods in terror assume different shapes to escape; Indra becomes a peacock, Yama a crow, Kuvera a lizard, and Varuna a swan; and each deity bestows a boon on the animal he had chosen. The peacock's tail recalls Indra's thousand eyes; the swan's colour becomes white, like the foam of the ocean (Varuna being its lord); the lizard obtains a golden colour; and the crow is never to die except when killed by a violent death, and the dead are to enjoy the funeral oblations when they have been 

devoured by the crows."  1 
Rávan then attacks Arjuna or Kárttavírya the mighty 
king of Máhishmati on the banks of the Narmadá, and is defeated, captured and imprisoned by Arjuna. At the intercession of Pulastya (Sect. XXII.) he is released from his bonds. He then visits Kishkindhá where he enters into alliance with Báli the King of the Vánars: "We will have all things in common," says Rávan, "dames, sons, cities and kingdoms, food, vesture, and all delights." His next exploit is the invasion of the kingdom of departed spirits and his terrific battle with the sovereign Yama. The poet in his description of these regions with the detested river with waves of blood, the dire lamentations, the cries for a drop of water, the devouring worm, all the tortures of the guilty and the somewhat insipid pleasures of the just, reminds one of the scenes in the under world so vividly described by Homer, Virgil, and Dante. Yama is defeated (Sect. XXVI.) by the giant, not so much by his superior power as because at the request of Brahmá Yama refrains from smiting with his deadly weapon the Rákshas enemy to whom that God had once given the promise that preserved him. In the twenty-seventh section Rávan goes "under the earth into Pátála the treasure-house of the waters inhabited by swarms of serpents and Daityas, and well defended by Varun." He subdues Bhogavati the city ruled by Vásuki and reduces the Nágas or serpents to subjection. He penetrates even to the 

imperial seat of Varun. The God himself is absent, but 
his sons come forth and do battle with the invader. The giant is victorious and departs triumphant. The twenty-eighth section gives the details of a terrific battle between Rávan and Mándhátá King of Ayodhya, a distinguished ancestor of Ráma. Supernatural weapons are employed on both sides and the issue of the conflict is long doubtful. But at last Mándhátá prepares to use the mighty weapon "acquired by severe austerities through the grace and favour of Rudra." The giant would inevitably have been slain. But two pre-eminent Munis Pulastya and Gálava beheld the fight through the power given by contemplation, and with words of exhortation they parted King Mándhátá and the sovereign of the Rákshases. Rávan at last (Sect. XXXII.) returns homeward carrying with him in his car Pushpak the virgin daughters of kings, of Rishis, of Daityas, and Gandharvas whom he has seized upon his way. The thirty-sixth section describes a battle with Indra. in which the victorious Meghanáda son of the giant, makes the King of the Gods his prisoner, binds him with his magic art, and carries him away (Sect. XXVII.) in triumph to Lanká. Brahmá intercedes (Sect. XXXVIII.) and Indrajit releases his prisoner *** obtaining in return the boon that sacrifice to the Lord of Fire shall always make him invincible in the coming battle. In sections XXXIX, XL, "we have a legend related to Ráma by the sage Agastya to account for the stupendous strength of the monkey Hanumat, as it had 

been described in the Rámáyana. Rama naturally 
wonders (as 
p. 521 
perhaps many readers of the Rámáyana have done since) why a monkey of such marvellous power and prowess had not easily overcome Báli and secured the throne for his friend Sugríva. Agastya replies that Hanumat was at that time under a curse from a Rishi, and consequently was not conscious of his own might."  
1 The whole story of the marvellous Vánar is here 
given at length, but nothing else of importance is added to the tale already given in the Rámáyana. The Rishis or saints then (Sect. XL.) return to their celestial seats, and the Vánars, Rákshases and bears also (Sect. XLIII.) take their departure. The chariot Pushpak is restored to its original owner Kuvera, as has already been related in the Rámáyan. 
The story of Ráma and Sitá is then continued, and we 
meet with matter of more human interest. The winter is past and the pleasant spring-time is come, and Ráma and Sitá sit together in the shade of the As'oka trees happy as Indra and S'achí when they drink in Paradise the nectar of the Gods. "Tell me, my beloved," says Ráma, "for thou wilt soon be a mother, hast thou a wish in thy heart for me to gratify?" And Sitá smiles and answers: "I long, O son of Raghu, to visit the pure and 

holy hermitages on the banks of the Ganges and to 
venerate the feet of the saints who there perform their rigid austerities and live on roots and berries. This is my chief desire, to stand within the hermits' grove were it but for a single day," And Ráma said: "Let not the thought trouble thee: thou shalt go to the grove of the ascetics," But slanderous tongues have been busy in Ayodhyá, and Sitá has not been spared. Ráma hears that the people are lamenting his blind folly in taking back to his bosom the wife who was so long a captive in the palace of Rávan. Ráma well knows her spotless purity in thought, word, and deed, and her perfect love of him; but he cannot endure the mockery and the shame and resolves to abandon his unsuspecting wife. He orders the sad but still obedient Lakshman to convey her to the hermitage which she wishes to visit and to leave her there, for he will see her face again no more. They arrive at the hermitage, and Lakshman tells her all. She falls fainting on the ground, and when she recovers her consciousness sheds some natural tears and bewails her cruel and undeserved lot. But she resolves to live for the sake of Ráma and her unborn son, and she sends by Lakshman a dignified message to the husband who has forsaken her: "I grieve not for myself," she says " because I have been abandoned on account of what the people say, and not for any evil that I have done, The husband is the God of the wife, the husband is her lord and guide; and what seems good unto him she should do even at the cost of her life." 

Sitá is honourably received by the saint Válmiki 
himself, and the holy women of the hermitage are charged to entertain and serve her. In this calm retreat she gives birth to two boys who receive the names of Kus'a and Lava. They are carefully brought up and are taught by Válmiki himself to recite the Rámáyan. The years pass by: and Ráma at length determines to celebrate the As'vamedha or Sacrifice of the Steed. Válmiki, with his two young pupils, attends the ceremony, and the unknown princes recite before the delighted father the poem which recounts his deeds. Ráma inquires into their history and recognizes them as his sons. Sitá is invited to return and solemnly affirm her innocence before the great assembly. 
"But Sitá's heart was too full; this second ordeal was 
beyond even her. power to submit to, and the poet rose above the ordinary Hindu level of women 
p. 522 
when be ventured to paint her conscious purity as rebelling: "Beholding all the spectators, and clothed in red garments, Sítá clasping her hands and bending low her face, spoke thus in a voice choked with tears: 'as I, even in mind, have never thought of any other than Ráma, so may Mádhaví the goddess of Earth, grant me a hiding-place.' As Sítá made this oath, lo! a marvel 

appeared. Suddenly cleaving the earth, a divine throne 
of marvellous beauty rose up, borne by resplendent dragons on their heads: and seated on it, the goddess of Earth, raising Sítá with her arm, said to her, 'Welcome to thee!' and placed her by her side. And as the queen, seated on the throne, slowly descended to Hades, a continuous shower of flowers fell down from heaven on her head."  
1 
"Both the great Hindu epics thus end in disappointment and sorrow. In the Mahábhárata the five victorious brothers abandon the hardly won throne to die one by one in a forlorn pilgrimage to the Himálaya; and in the same way Ráma only regains his wife, after all his toils, to lose her. It is the same in the later Homeric cycle-the heroes of the Iliad perish by ill-fated deaths. And even Ulysses, after his return to Ithaca, sets sail again to Thesprotia, and finally falls by the hand of his own son. But in India and Greece alike this is an afterthought of a self-conscious time, which has been subsequently added to cast a gloom on the strong cheerfulness of the heroic age."  
2 
"The termination of Ráma's terrestrial career is thus told in Sections 116 ff. of the Uttarakánda. Time, in the form of an ascetic, comes to his palace gate, and asks, as the messenger of the great rishi (Brahmá) to see Ráma. He is admitted and received with honour, but says, when he is asked what he has to communicate, that his message 

must be delivered in private, and that any one who 
witnesses the interview is to lose his life. Ráma informs Laxmana of all this, and desires him to stand outside. Time then tells Ráma that he has been sent by Brahmá, to say that when he (Ráma, i.e. Vishnu) after destroying the worlds was sleeping on the ocean, he had formed him (Brahmá) from the lotus springing from his navel, and committed to him the work of creation; that he (Brahmá) had then entreated Ráma to assume the function of Preserver, and that the latter had in consequence become Vishnu, being born as the son of Aditi, and had determined to deliver mankind by destroying Rávana, and to live on earth ten thousand and ten hundred years; that period, adds Time, was now on the eve of expiration, and Ráma could either at his pleasure prolong his stay on earth, or ascend to heaven and rule over the gods, Ráma replies, that he had been born for the good of the three worlds, and would now return to the place whence he had come, as it was his function to fulfil the purposes of the gods. While they are speaking the irritable rishi Durvásas comes, and insists on seeing Ráma immediately, under a threat, if refused, of cursing Ráma and all his family. 
Laxmana, preferring to save his kinsman, though 
knowing that his own death must he the consequence of interrupting the interview of Ráma with Time, enters the palace and reports the rishi's message to Ráma. Ráma comes out, and 

p. 523 
when Durvásas has got the food he wished, and 
departed, Ráma reflects with great distress on the words of Time, which require that Laxmana should die. Laxmana however exhorts Ráma not to grieve, but to abandon him and not break his own promise. The counsellors concurring in this advice, Ráma abandons Laxmana, who goes to the river Sarayú, suppresses all his senses, and is conveyed bodily by Indra to heaven. The gods are delighted by the arrival of the fourth part of Vishnu. Ráma then resolves to install Bharata as his successor and retire to the forest and follow Laxmana. Bharata however refuses the succession, and determines to accompany his brother. Ráma's subjects are filled with grief, and say they also will follow him wherever he goes. Messengers are sent to S'atrughna, the other brother, and he also resolves to accompany Ráma; who at length sets out in procession from his capital with all the ceremonial appropriate to the "great departure," silent, indifferent to external objects, joyless, with S'rí on his right, the goddess Earth on his left, Energy in front, attended by all his weapons in human shapes, by the Vedas in the forms of Brahmans, by the Gáyatri, the Omkára, the Vashatkára, by rishis, by his women, female slaves, eunuchs, and servants. Bharata with his family, and S'atrughna, follow together with Brahmans bearing the sacred fire, and the whole of the people of 

the country, and even with animals, etc., etc. Ráma, 
with all these attendants, comes to the banks of the Sarayú. Brahmá, with all the gods and innumerable celestial cars, now appears, and all the sky is refulgent with the divine splendour, Pure and fragrant breezes blow, a shower of flowers falls. Ráma enters the waters of the Sarayú; and Brahmá utters a voice from the sky, saying: "Approach, Vishnu; Rághava, thou hast happily arrived, with thy godlike brothers. Enter thine own body as Vishnu or the eternal ether. For thou art the abode of the worlds: no one comprehends thee, the inconceivable and imperishable, except the large-eyed Máyá thy primeval spouse." Hearing these words, Ráma enters the glory of Vishnu with his body and his followers. He then asks Brahmá to find an abode for the people who had accompanied him from devotion to his person, and Brahmá appoints them a celestial residence accordingly."  
1 
p. 524 
ADDITIONAL NOTES 
QUEEN FORTUNE. 'A curious festival is celebrated in honour of this 
divinity (Lakshmí) on the fifth lunar day of the light half of the month Mâgha (February), when she is identified with Saraswatí the consort of Brahmá, and the 

goddess of learning. In his treatise on festivals, a great 
modern authority, Raghunandana, mentions, on the faith of a work called Samvatsara-sandipa, that Lakshmí is to be worshipped in the forenoon of that day with flowers, perfumes, rice, and water; that due honour is to be paid to inkstand and writing-reed, and no writing to be done. Wilson, in his essay on the Religious Festivals of the Hindus (works, vol. ii, p. 188. ff.). adds that on the morning of the 2nd February, the whole of the pens and inkstands, and the books, if not too numerous and bulky, are collected, the pens or reeds cleaned, the inkstands scoured, and the books wrapped up in new cloth, are arranged upon a platform, or a sheet, and strewn over with flowers and blades of young barley, and that no flowers except white are to be offered. After performing the necessary rites,.........all the members of the family assemble and make their prostrations; the books, the pens, and ink having an entire holiday; and should any emergency require a written communication on the day dedicated to the divinity of scholarship, it is done with chalk or charcoal upon a black or white board.' 
Chambers's Encyclopaedia. Lakshmí. 
INDRA. 
'The Hindu Jove or Jupiter Tonans, chief of the 
secondary deities. He presides over swarga or paradise, 

and is more particularly the god of the atmosphere and 
winds. He is also regent of the east quarter of the sky. As chief of the deities he is called Devapati, Devadeva, Surapati, etc; as lord of the atmosphere Divaspati: as lord of the eight Vasus or demigods, Fire, etc., Vásava: as breaking cities into fragments, Purandara, Puranda: as lord of a hundred sacrifices (the performance of a hundred As'vamedhas elevating the sacrficer to the rank of Indra) S'atakratu, S'atamakha; as having a thousand eyes, Sahasráksha; as husband of S'achí, S'achípati. His wife is called S'achí, Indrání, Sakrání, Maghoni, Indras'akti, Pulomajá. and Paulomi. His son is Jayanta. His pleasure garden or elysium is Nandana; his city, Amarávati; his palace, Vaijayanta; his horse, Uchchaihs'ravas, his elephant, Airávata; his charioteer, Mátali.' 
Professor M. William's English-Sanskrit Dictionary. 
Indra. 
VISHNU. 
'The second person of the Hindu triad, and the most 
celebrated and popular of all the Indian deities. He is the personification of the preserving power, and became incarnate in nine different forms, for the preservation of mankind in various emergencies. Before the creation of the universe, and after its temporary annihilation, he is supposed to sleep on the waters, floating on the serpent 

Sesha, and is then identified with Náráyana. Brahmá, 
the creator, is fabled to spring at that time from a lotus which grows from his navel, whilst thus asleep ..... ......His ten avatárs or incarnations are: 
p. 525 
I. The Matsya, or fish. In this avatár Vishnu descended in the form of a fish to save the pious king Satyavrata, who with the seven Rishis and their wives had taken refuge in the ark to escape the deluge which then destroyed the earth. 2, The Kúrma, or Tortoise. In this he descended in the form of a tortoise, for the purpose of restoring to man some of the comforts lost during the flood. To this end he stationed himself at the bottom of the ocean, and allowed the point of the great mountain Mandara to be placed upon his back, which served as a hard axis, whereon the gods and demons, with the serpent Vásuki twisted round the mountain for a rope, churned the waters for the recovery of the amrita or nectar, and fourteen other sacred things. 3. The Varáha, or Boar. In this he descended in the form of a boar to rescue the earth from the power of a demon called 'golden-eyed,' Hiranyáksha. This demon had seized on the earth and carried it with him into the depths of the ocean. Vishnu dived into the abyss, and after a contest of a thousand years slew the monster. 4 The Narasinha, or Man-lion. In this monstrous shape of a creature half-man, half-lion, Vishnu delivered the earth from the 

tyranny of an insolent demon called Hiranyakas'ipu. 5. 
Vámana, or Dwarf. This avatár happened in the second age of the Hindús or Tretáyug, the four preceding are said to have occurred in the first or Satyayug; the object of this avatár was to trick Balí out of the dominion of the three worlds. Assuming the form of a wretched dwarf he appeared before the king and asked, as a boon, as much land as he could pace in three steps. This was granted; and Vishnu immediately expanding himself till he filled the world, deprived Balí at two steps of heaven and earth, but in consideration of some merit, left Pátála still in his dominion. 6. Parasuráma. 7. Rámchandra, 8. Krishna, or according to some Balaráma. 9. Buddha. In this avatár Vishnu descended in the form of a sage for the purpose of making some reform in the religion of the Brahmins, and especially to reclaim them from their proneness to animal sacrifice. Many of the Hindús will not allow this to have been an incarnation of their favourite god. 10. Kalki, or White Horse. This is yet to come. Vishnu mounted on a white horse, with a drawn scimitar, blazing like a comet, will, according to prophecy, end this present age, viz. the fourth or Kaliyug, by destroying the world, and then renovating creation by an age of purity.' 
WILLIAMS'S DICTIONARY. Vishnu. 
S'IVA. 

A celebrated Hindú God, the Destroyer of creation, and 
therefore the most formidable of the Hindú Triad. He also personifies reproduction, since the Hindú philosophy excludes the idea of total annihilation without subsequent regeneration. Hence he is sometimes confounded with Brahmá, the creator or first person of the Triad. He is the particular God of the Tántrikas, or followers of the books called Tantras. His worshippers are termed S'aivas, and although not so numerous as the Vaishnavas, exalt their god to the highest place in the heavens, and combine in him many of the attributes which properly belong to the other deities. According to them S'iva is Time, Justice, Fire, Water, the Sun, the Destroyer and Creator. As presiding over generation, his type is the Linga, or Phallus, the origin probably of the Phallic emblem of Egypt and Greece. As the God of generation and justice, which latter character he shares with the god Yama, he is represented riding a white bull. His own colour, as well as that of the bull, is generally white, referring probably to the unsullied purity of Justice, 
p. 526 
His throat is dark-blue; his hair of alight reddish colour, and thickly matted together, and gathered above his head like the hair of an ascetic. He is sometimes seen with two hands, sometimes with four, eight, or ten, and with five faces. He has three eyes, one being in the 

centre of his forehead, pointing up and down. These are 
said to denote his view of the three divisions of time, past, present, and future. He holds a trident in his hand to denote, as some say, his relationship to water, or according to others, to show that the three great attributes of Creator, Destroyer, and Regenerator are combined in him. His loins are enveloped in a tiger's skin. In his character of Time, he not only presides over its extinction, but also its astronomical regulation. A crescent or half-moon on his forehead indicates the measure of time by the phases of the moon; a serpent forms one of his necklaces to denote the measure of time by years, and a second necklace of human skulls marks the lapse and revolution of ages, and the extinction and succession of the generations of mankind. He is often represented as entirely covered with serpents, which are the emblems of immortality. They are bound in his hair, round his neck, wrists, waist, arms and legs; they serve as rings for his fingers, and earrings for his ears, and are his constant companions, S'iva has more than a thousand names which are detailed at length in the sixty-ninth chapter of the S'iva Purán'a.--WILLIAMS'S DICTIONARY, S'iva. 
APSARASES. 
   'Originally these deities seem to have been 
personifications of the vapours which are attracted by the sun, and form into mist or clouds: their character 

may be thus interpreted in the few hymns of the 
Rigveda where mention is made of them. At a subsequent period when the Gandharva of the Rigveda who personifies there especially the Fire of the Sun, expanded into the Fire of Lightning, the rays of the moon and other attributes of the elementary life of heaven as well as into pious acts referring to it, the Apsarasas become divinities which represent phenomena or objects both of a physical and ethical kind closely associated with that life; thus in the Yajurveda Sunbeams are called the Apsarasas associated with the Gandharva who is the Sun; Plants are termed the Apsarasas connected with the Gandharva Fire: Constellations are the Apsarasas of the Gandharva Moon: Waters the Apsarasas of the Gandharva Wind, etc. etc.................... In the last Mythological epoch when the Gandharvas have saved from their elementary nature merely so much as to be musicians in the paradise of Indra, the Apsarasas appear among other subordinate deities which share in the merry life of Indra's heaven, as the wives of the Gandharvas, but more especially as wives of a licentious sort, and they are promised therefore, too, as a reward to heroes fallen in battle when they are received in the paradise of Indra; and while, in the Rigveda, they assist Soma to pour down his floods, they descend in the epic literature on earth merely to shake the virtue of penitent Sages and to deprive them of the power they would otherwise have acquired through unbroken austerities.'--

GOLDSTÜCKER'S Sanskrit Dictionary. 
VISHN'U'S INCARNATION AS RÁMA. 
'Here is described one of the avatárs, descents or 
manifestations of Vishn'u in a visible form. The word avatár signifies literally descent. The avatár which is here spoken of, that in which, according to Indian traditions, Vishn'u descended 
p. 527 
and appeared upon earth in the corporeal form of Ráma, the hero of the Rámáyana, is the seventh in the series of Indian avatars. Much has been said before now of these avatars, and through deficient knowledge of the ideas and doctrines of India, they have been compared to the sublime dogma of the Christian Incarnation. This is one of the grossest errors that ignorance of the ideas and beliefs of a people has produced. Between the avatars of India and the Christian Incarnation there is such an immensity of difference that it is impossible to find any reasonable analogy that can approximate them. The idea of the avatars is intimately united with that of the Trimúrti; the bond of connection between these two ideas is an essential notion common to both, the notion of Vishnu. What is the Trimurti? I have already said that it is composed of three Gods, Brahma (masculine), Vishnu the God of avatárs, and S'iva. These three Gods, 

who when reduced to their primitive and most simple 
expression are but three cosmogonical personifications, three powers or forces of nature, these Gods, I say, are here found, according to Indian doctrines, entirely external to the true God of India, or Brahma in the neuter gender. Brahma is alone, unchangeable in the midst of creation: all emanates from him, he comprehends all, but he remains extraneous to all: he is Being and the negation of beings. Brahma is never worshipped; the indeterminate Being is never invoked; he is inaccessible to the prayers as the actions of man; humanity, as well as nature, is extraneous to him. External to Brahma rises the Trimurti, that is to say, Brahmá (masculine) the power which creates, Vishnu the power which preserves, and S'iva the power which destroys: theogony here commences at the same time with cosmogony. The three divinities of the Trimurti govern the phenomena of the universe and influence all nature. The real God of India is by himself without power; real efficacious power is attributed only to three divinities who exist externally to him. Brahmá, Vishnu, and S'iva, possessed of qualities in part contradictory and attributes that are mutually exclusive, have no other accord or harmony than that which results from the power of things itself, and which is found external to their own thoughts. Such is the Indian Trimurti. What an immense difference between this Triad and the wonderful Trinity of Christianity! Here there is only one God, who created all, provides for all, governs all. 

He exists in three Persons equal to one another, and 
intimately united in one only infinite and eternal substance. The Father represents the eternal thought and the power which created, the Son infinite love, the Holy Spirit universal sanctification. This one and triune God completes by omnipotent power the great work of creation which, when it has come forth from His hands, proceeds in obedience to the laws which He has given it, governed with certain order by His infinite providence. 
The immense difference between the Trimurti of India 
and the Christian Trinity is found again between the avatars of Vishnu and the Incarnation of Christ. The avatar was effected altogether externally to the Being who is in India regarded as the true God, The manifestation of one essentially cosmogonical divinity wrought for the most part only material and cosmogonical prodigies. At one time it takes the form of the gigantic tortoise which sustains Mount Mandar from sinking in the ocean; at another of the fish which raises the lost Veda from the bottom of the sea, and saves mankind from the waters. When these avatars are not cosmogonical they consist in some protection accorded to 
p. 528 
men or Gods, a protection which is neither universal nor 

permanent. The very manner in which the avatár is 
effected corresponds to its material nature, for instance the mysterious vase and the magic liquor by means of which the avatár here spoken of takes place. What are the forms which Vishn'u takes in his descents? They are the simple forms of life; he becomes a tortoise, a boar, a fish, but he is not obliged to take the form of intelligence and liberty, that is to say, the form of man, In the avatár of Vishn'u is discovered the inpress of pantheistic ideas which have always more or less prevailed in India. Does the avatár produce a permanent and definitive result in the world? By no means. It is renewed at every catastrophe either of nature or man, and its effects are only transitory........... To sum up then, the Indian avatár is effected externally to the true God of India, to Brahma; it has only a cosmogonical or historical mission which is neither lasting nor decisive; it is accomplished by means of strange prodigies and magic transformations; it may assume promiscuously all the forms of life; it may be repeated indefinitely. Now let the whole of this Indian idea taken from primitive tradition be compared with the Incarnation of Christ and it will be seen that there is between the two an irreconcilable difference. According to the doctrines of Christianity the Everlasting Word, Infinite Love, the Son of God, and equal to Him, assumed a human body, and being born as a man accomplished by his divine act the great miracle of the spiritual redemption of man. His coming had for its sole object to bring erring and lost 

humanity back to Him; this work being accomplished, 
and the divine union of men with God being re-established, redemption is complete and remains eternal. 
   The superficial study of India produced in the last 
century many erroneous ideas, many imaginary and false parallels between Christianity and the Brahmanical religion. A profounder knowledge of Indian civilization and religion, and philological studies enlarged and guided by more certain principles have dissipated one by one all those errors. The attributes of the Christian God, which by one of those intellectual errors, which Vico attributes to the vanity of the learned, had been transferred to Vishnu, have by a better inspired philosophy been reclaimed for Christianity, and the result of the two religions, one immovable and powerless, the other diffusing itself with all its inherent force and energy, has shown further that there is a difference, a real opposition, between the two principles.'--GORRESIO. 
KUS'A AND LAVA, Page 10. 
   As the story of the banishment of Sítá and the 
subsequent birth in Válmíki's hermitage of Kus'a and Lava the rhapsodists of the Rámáyan, is intimately connected with the account in the introductory cantos of Válmíki's composition of the poem, I shall, I trust, be 

pardoned for extracting it from my rough translation of 
Kálidása's Raghuvan's'a, parts only of which have been offered to the public. 
'Then, day by day, the husband's hope grew high,
Gazing with love on Sítá's melting eye:With anxious care he saw her pallid cheek,And fondly bade her all her wishes speak.'Once more I fain would see,' the lady cried,'The sacred groves that rise on Gangá's side,
p. 529
Where holy grass is ever fresh and green,And cattle feeding on the rice are seen:There would I rest awhile, where once I strayedLinked in sweet friendship to each hermit maid.'And Ráma smiled upon his wife, and sware,With many a tender oath, to grant her prayer.It chanced, one evening, from a lofty seatHe viewed Ayodhyá stretched before his feet:He looked with pride upon the royal roadLined with gay shops their glittering stores that showed,He looked on Sarjú's silver waves, that boreThe light barks flying with the sail and oar;He saw the gardens near the town that lay,Filled with glad citizens and boys at play.Then swelled the monarch *bosom with delight,And his heart triumphed at the happy sight.

He turned to Bhadra, standing by his side,--
Upon whose secret news the king relied.--And bade him say what people said and thoughtOf all the exploits that his arm had wrought.The spy was silent, but, when questioned still.Thus spake, obedient to his master's will:'For all thy deeds in peace and battle doneThe people praise thee. King, except for one:This only act of all thy life they blame,--Thy welcome home of her, thy ravished dame.'Like iron yielding to the iron's blow.Sank Ráma, smitten by those words of woe.His breast, where love and fear for empire vied,Swayed, like a rapid swing, from side to side.Shall he this rumour scorn, which blots his life,Or banish her, his dear and spotless wife?But rigid Duty left no choice betweenHis perilled honour and his darling queen.Called to his side, his brothers wept to traceThe marks of anguish in his altered face.No longer bright and glorious as of old.He thus addressed them when the tale was told:'Alas! my brothers, that my life should blotThe fame of those the Sun himself begot:As from the labouring cloud the driven rainLeaves on the mirror's polished face a stain.E'en as an elephant who loathes the stakeAnd the strong chain he has no power to break,I cannot brook this cry on every side,

That spreads like oil upon the moving tide.
I leave the daughter of Videha's King,And the fair blossom soon from her to spring,
p. 530
As erst, obedient to my sire's command,I left the empire of the sea-girt land.Good is my queen, and spotless; but the blameIs hard to bear, the mockery and the shame.Men blame the pure Moon for the darkened ray.When the black shadow takes the light awayAnd, O my brothers, if ye wish to seeRáma live long from this reproach set free,Let not your pity labour to controlThe firm sad purpose of his changeless soul.'
Thus Ráma spake. The sorrowing brothers beard
His stern resolve, without an answering word;For none among them dared his voice to raise,That will to question:--and they could not praise.'Beloved brother,' thus the monarch criedTo his dear Lakshman, whom he called aside.--Lakshman, who knew no will save his aloneWhose hero deeds through all the world were known:--'My queen has told me that s*he longs to roveBeneath the shade of Saint Válmíki's grove:Now mount thy car, away my lady bear;Tell all, and leave her in the forest there.'

The car was brought, the gentle lady smiled,
As the glad news her trusting heart beguiled.She mounted up: Sumantra held the reins;And forth the coursers bounded o'er the plains.She saw green fields in all their beauty dressed,And thanked her husband in her loving breast.Alas! deluded queen! she little knewHow changed was he whom she believed so true;How one she worshipped like the Heavenly TreeCould, in a moment's time, so deadly be.Her right eye throbbed,--ill-omened sign, to tellThe endless loss of him she loved so well,And to the lady's saddening heart revealedThe woe that Lakshman, in his love, concealed.Pale grew the bloom of her sweet face,--as fadeThe lotus blossoms,--by that sign dismayed.'Oh. may this omen,'--was her silent prayer,--'No grief to Ráma or his brothers bear I'
When Lakshman, faithful to his brother, stood
Prepared to leave her in the distant wood,The holy Gangá, flowing by the way,Raised all her hands of waves to bid him stay.At length with sobs and burning tears that rolledDown his sad face, the king's command he told;As when a monstrous cloud, in evil hour,
p. 531

Rains from its labouring womb a stony shower.
She heard, she swooned, she fell upon the earth,Fell on that bosom whence she sprang to birth.As, when the tempest in its fury flies,Low in the dust the prostrate creeper lies,So, struck with terror sank she on the ground,And all her gems, like flowers, lay scattered round.But Earth, her mother, closed her stony breast.And, filled with doubt, denied her daughter rest.She would not think the Chief of Raghu's raceWould thus his own dear guiltless wife disgrace.Stunned and unconscious, long the lady lay,And felt no grief, her senses all astray.But gentle Lakshman, with a brother's care,Brought back her sense, and with her sense, despair.But not her wrongs, her shame, her grief, could wringOne angry word against her lord the King:Upon herself alone the blame she laid.For tears and sighs that would not yet be stayed.To soothe her anguish Lakshman gently strove;He showed the path to Saint Válmíki's grove;And craved her pardon for the share of illHe wrought, obedient to his brother's will.'O, long and happy, dearest brother, live!I have to praise', she cried,' and not forgive:To do his will should be thy noblest praise;As Vishn'u ever Indra's will obeys.Return, dear brother: on each royal dameBestow a blessing in poor Sítá's name,

And bid them, in their love, kind pity take
Upon her offspring, for the father's sake.And speak my message in the monarch's ear,The last last words of mine that he shall hear:'Say, was it worthy of thy noble raceThy guiltless queen thus lightly to disgrace?For idle tales to spurn thy faithful bride,Whose constant truth the searching fire had tried?Or may I hope thy soul refused consent,And but thy voice decreed my banishment?Hope that no care could turn, no love could stayThe lightning stroke that falls on me to-day?That sins committed in the life that's fledHave brought this evil on my guilty head?Think not I value now my widowed life,Worthless to her who once was Ráma's wife.I only live because I hope to seeThe dear dear babe that will resemble thee.And then my task of penance shall be done,
p. 532
With eyes uplifted to the scorching sun;So shall the life that is to come restoreMine own dear husband, to be lost no more.'And Lakshman swore her every word to tell,Then turned to go, and bade the queen farewell.Alone with all her woes, her piteous criesRose like a butchered lamb's that struggling dies.

The reverend sage who from his dwelling came
For sacred grass and wood to feed the flame,Heard her loud shrieks that rent the echoing wood,And, quickly following, by the mourner stood.Before the sage the lady bent her low,Dried her poor eyes, and strove to calm her woe.With blessings on her hopes the blameless manIn silver tones his soothing speech began:'First of all faithful wives, O Queen, art thou;And can I fail to mourn thy sorrows now?Rest in this holy grove, nor harbour fearWhere dwell in safety e'en the timid deer.Here shall thine offspring safely see the light,And be partaker of each holy rite.Here, near the hermits' dwellings, shall thou laveThy limbs in *Tonse's* sin-destroying wave,And on her isles, by prayer and worship, gainSweet peace of mind, and rest from care and pain.Each hermit maiden with her sweet soft voice,Shall soothe thy woe, and bid thy heart rejoice:With fruit and early flowers thy lap shall fill,And offer grain that springs for us at will.And here, with labour light, thy task shall beTo water carefully each tender tree,And learn how sweet a nursing mother's joyEre on thy bosom rest thy darling boy.'
That very night the banished Sítá bare
Two royal children, most divinely fair.

The saint Válmíki, with a friend's delight,
Graced Sítá's offspring with each holy rite.Kus'a and Lava--such the names they bore--Learnt, e'en in childhood, all the Vedas' lore;And then the bard, their minstrel souls to train,Taught them to sing his own immortal strain.And Ráma's deeds her boys so sweetly sang,That Sítá's breast forgot her bitterest pang.
p. 533
   Then Sítá's children, by the saint's command,   Sang the Rámáyan, wandering through the land.   How could the glorious poem fail to gain   Each heart, each ear that listened to the strain!   So sweet each minstrel's voice who sang the praise   Of Ráma deathless in Válmíki's lays.   Ráma himself amid the wondering throng   Marked their fair forms, and loved the noble song,   While, still and weeping, round the nobles stood,   As, on a windless morn, a dewy wood.   On the two minstrels all the people gazed,   Praised their fair looks and marvelled as they praised;   For every eye amid the throng could trace   Ráma's own image in each youthful face.   Then spoke the king himself and bade them say   Who was their teacher, whose the wondrous lay.   Soon as Válmíki, mighty saint, he saw,

   He bowed his head in reverential awe.
   'These are thy children' cried the saint,'recall   Thine own dear Sítá, pure and true through all.   'O holy father,' thus the king replied,   'The faithful lady by the fire was tried;   But the foul demon's too successful arts   Raised light suspicions in my people's hearts.   Grant that their breasts may doubt her faith no more,   And thus my Sítá and her sons restore.'
             Raghuvans'a Cantos XIV, XV.
PARAS'URÁMA, PAGE 87. 
'He cleared the earth thrice seven times of the Kshatriya 
caste, and filled with their blood the five large lakes of Samanta, from which he offered libations to the race of Bhrigu. Offering a solemn sacrifice to the King of the Gods Paras'uráma presented the earth to the ministering priests. Having given the earth to Kas'vapa, the hero of immeasurable prowess retired to the Mahendra mountain, where he still resides; and in this manner was there enmity between him and the race of the Kshatriyas, and thus was the whole earth conquered by Paras'uráma.' The destruction of the Kshatriyas by Paras'uráma had been provoked by the cruelty of the Kshatriyas. Chips from a German Workshop, Vol. II. p.334. 

The scene in which he appears is probably interpolated 
for the sake of making him declare Ráma to be Vishnu. 'Herr von Schlegel has often remarked to me,' says Lassen,'that without injuring the connexion of the story all the chapters [of the Rámáyan} might be omitted in which Ráma is regarded as an incarnation of Vishn'u. In fact, where the incarnation of Vishn'u as the four sons of Das'aratha is described, the great sacrifice is already ended, and all the priests remunerated at the termination, when the new sacrifice begins at which the Gods appear, then withdraw, and then first propose the incarnation to Vishnu, 
p. 534 
If it had been an original circumstance of the story, the Gods would certainly have deliberated on the matter earlier, and the celebration of the sacrifice would have continued without interruption.' LASSEN, Indische Alterthumskunde, Vol. I. p.489. 
YAMA, PAGE 68. Son of Vivasvat=Jima son of Vivanghvat, the Jamahid 
of the later Persians. 
FATE PAGE 68. 

'The idea of fate was different in India from that which 
prevailed in Greece. In Greece fate was a mysterious, inexorable power which governed men and human events, and from which it was impossible to escape. In India Fate was rather an inevitable consequence of actions done in births antecedent to one's present state of existence, and was therefore connected with the doctrine of metempsychosis. A misfortune was for the most part a punishment, an expiation of ancient faults not yet entirely cancelled.' GORRESIO. 
VIS'VÁMITRA. PAGE 76. 
'Though of royal extraction, Vis'vámitra conquered for 
himself and his family the privileges of a Brahman. He became a Brahman, and thus broke through all the rules of caste. The Brahmans cannot deny the fact, because it forms one of the principal subjects of their legendary poems. But they have spared no pains to represent the exertions of Vis'vámitra, in his struggle for Brahmanhood, as so superhuman that no one would easily be tempted to follow his example. No mention is made of these monstrous penances in the Veda, where the struggle between Vis'vámitra, the leader of the Kus'ikas or Bharatas, and the Brahman Vas'ishtha, the leader of the white-robed Tritsus, is represented as the struggle of two rivals for the place of Purohita or chief priest and minister at the court of King Sudás, the son of Pijavana.' Chips from a German Workshop, Vol. II. 

p.336. 
HOUSEHOLD GODS, PAGE 102. 
'No house is supposed to be without its tutelary divinity, 
but the notion attached to this character is now very far from precise. The deity who is the object of hereditary and family worship, the Kuladeváta, is always one of the leading personages of the Hindu mythology, as S'iva, Vishnu or Durgá, but the Grihadevatá rarely bears any distinct appellation. In Bengal, the domestic god is sometimes the Sábagrám stone, sometimes the tulasi plant, sometimes a basket with a little rice in it, and sometimes a water-jar--to either of which a brief adoration is daily addressed, most usually by the females of the family. Occasionally small images of Lakshmi or Chandi fulfil the office, or should a snake appear, he is venerated as the guardian of the dwelling. In general, however, in former times, the household deities were regarded as the unseen spirits of ill, the ghosts and goblins who hovered about every spot, and claimed some particular sites as their own. Offerings were made to them in the open air, by scattering a little rice with a short formula at the close of all ceremonies to keep them in good humour. 
The household gods correspond better with the genii 
locorum than with the lares or penates of autiquity.' H. H. WILSON 

p. 535 
PAGE 107. 
S'aivya, a king whom earth obeyed,
Once to a hawk a promise made.
The following is a free version of this very ancient story which occurs more than once in the Mahábhárat: 
THE SUPPLIANT DOVE.
Chased by a hawk there came a dove
   With worn and weary wing,And took her stand upon the hand   Of Kás'í's mighty king.The monarch smoothed her ruffled plumes   And laid her on his breast,And cried, 'No fear shall vex thee here,   Rest, pretty egg-born, rest!Fair Kás'i's realm is rich and wide,   With golden harvests gay,But all that's mine will I resign   Ere I my guest betray.'But panting for his half won spoil   The hawk was close behind.And with wild cry and eager eye

   Came swooping down the wind:
'This bird', he cried, 'my destined prize,   'Tis not for thee to shield:'Tis mine by right and toilsome flight   O'er hill and dale and field.Hunger and thirst oppress me sore,   And I am faint with toil:Thou shouldst not stay a bird of prey   Who claims his rightful spoil.They say thou art a glorious king,   And justice is thy care:Then justly reign in thy domain,   Nor rob the birds of air.'Then cried the king: 'A cow or deer   For thee shall straightway bleed,Or let a ram or tender lamb   Be slain, for thee to feed.Mine oath forbids me to betray   My little twice-born guest:See how she clings with trembling wings   To her protector's breast.''No flesh of lambs,' the hawk replied,   'No blood of deer for me;The falcon loves to feed on doves   And such is Heaven's decree.But if affection for the dove
p. 536

     Thy pitying heart has stirred,
   Let thine own flesh my maw refresh,     Weighed down against the bird.'   He carved the flesh from off his side,     And threw it in the scale,   While women's cries smote on the skies     With loud lament and wail.   He hacked the flesh from side and arm,     From chest and back and thigh,   But still above the little dove     The monarch's scale stood high.   He heaped the scale with piles of flesh,     With sinews, blood and skin,   And when alone was left him bone     He threw himself therein.   Then thundered voices through the air;     The sky grew black as night;   And fever took the earth that shook     To see that wondrous sight.   The blessed Gods, from every sphere,     By Indra led, came nigh:   While drum and flute and shell and lute     Made music in the sky.   They rained immortal chaplets down,     Which hands celestial twine,   And softly shed upon his head     Pure Amrit, drink divine.   Then God and Seraph, Bard and Nymph     Their heavenly voices raised,

   And a glad throng with dance and song
     The glorious monarch praised.   They set him on a golden car     That blazed with many a gem;   Then swiftly through the air they flew,     And bore him home with them.   Thus Kás'í's lord, by noble deed,     Won heaven and deathless fame:   And when the weak protection seek     From thee, do thou the same.
Scenes from the Ramayan, &c.
PAGE 108. 
The ceremonies that attended the consecration of a king 
(Abhisheka lit. Sprinkling over) are fully described in Goldstücker's Dictionary, from which the following extract is made: 'The type of the inauguration ceremony as practised at the Epic period may probably be recognized in the history of the inauguration of Ráma, as told in the Rámáyana, and in that of the inauguration of Yudhishtira, as told in the Mahábháratha. Neither ceremony is described in these poems 
p. 537 
with the full detail which is given of the vaidik rite in the Aitareya-Bráhmanam; but the allusion that Ráma 

was inaugurated by Vasishtha and the other Bráhmanas 
in the same manner as Indra by the Vasus...and the observation which is made in some passages that a certain rite of the inauguration was performed 'according to the sacred rule'...admit of the conclusion that the ceremony was supposed to have taken place in conformity with the vaidik injunction.... As the inauguration of Ráma was intended and the necessary preparations for it were made when his father Das'aratha was still alive, but as the ceremony itself, through the intrigues of his step-mother Kaikeyí, did not take place then, but fourteen years later, after the death of Das'aratha, an account of the preparatory ceremonies is given in the Ayodhyákánda (Book II) as well as in the Yuddha-Kánda (Book VI.) of the Rámáyana, but an account of the complete ceremony in the latter book alone. According to the Ayodhyákánda, on the day preceding the intended inauguration Ráma and his wife Sítá held a fast, and in the night they performed this preliminary rite: Ráma having made his ablutions, approached the idol of Náráyana, took a cup of clarified butter, as the religious law prescribes, made a libation of it into the kindled fire, and drank the remainder while wishing what was agreeable to his heart. Then, with his mind fixed on the divinity he lay, silent and composed, together with Sítá, on a bed of Kus'a-grass, which was spread before the altar of Vishnu, until the last watch of the night, when he awoke and ordered the palace to be prepared for the solemnity. At day-break reminded of 

the time by the voices of the bards, he performed the 
usual morning devotion and praised the divinity. In the meantime the town Ayodhyá had assumed a festive appearance and the inauguration implements had been arranged...golden water-jars, an ornamented throne-seat, a chariot covered with a splendid tiger-skin, water taken from the confluence of the Ganges and Jumna, as well as from other sacred rivers, tanks, wells, lakes, and from all oceans, honey, curd, clarified butter, fried grain, Kus'a-grass, flowers, milk; besides, eight beautiful damsels, and a splendid furious elephant, golden and silver jars, filled with water, covered with Udumbara branches and various lotus flowers, besides a white jewelled chourie, a white splendid parasol, a white bull, a white horse, all manner of musical instruments and bards....In the preceding chapter...there are mentioned two white chouries instead of one, and all kinds of seeds, perfumes and jewels, a scimitar, a bow, a litter, a golden vase, and a blazing fire, and amongst the living implements of the pageant, instead of the bards, gaudy courtesans, and besides the eight damsels, professors of divinity, Bráhmanas, cows and pure kinds of wild beasts and birds, the chiefs of town and country-people and the citizens with their train.' 
PAGE 109. 
   Then with the royal chaplains they

   Took each his place *in* long array.
   The twice born chiefs, with zealous heed,   Made ready what the rite would need.
'Now about the office of a Purohita (house priest). The gods do not eat the food offered by a king, who has a house-priest (Purohita). Thence the king even when (not) intending to bring a sacrifice, would appoint a Bráhman to the office of house-priest.' HA*UG'S A*dureya Bráhmanam. Vol. II. p. 523. 35 
p. 538 
PAGE 110. 
There by the gate the Sáras screamed.
The Sáras or Indian Crane is a magnificent bird easily domesticated and speedily constituting himself the watchman of his master's house and garden. Unfortunately he soon becomes a troublesome and even dangerous dependent, attacking strangers with his long bill and powerful wings, and warring especially upon 'small infantry' with unrelenting ferocity. 
PAGE 120. 

My mothers or my sire the king.
All the wives of the king his father are regarded and 
spoken of by Ráma as his mothers. 
PAGE 125. 
Such blessings as the Gods o'erjoyed
      Poured forth when Vritra was destroyed.
Mythology regards Vritra as a demon or Asur, the implacable enemy of Indra, but this is not the primitive idea contained in the name of Vritra. In the hymns of the Veda Vritra appears to be the thick dark cloud which Indra the God of the firmament attacks and disperses with his thunderbolt.' GORRESIO. 
'In that class of Rig-veda hymns which there is reason 
to look upon as the oldest portion of Vedic poetry, the character of Indra is that of a mighty ruler of the firmament, and his principal feat is that of conquering the demon Vritra, a symbolical personification of the cloud which obstructs the clearness of the sky, and withholds the fructifying rain from the earth. In his battles with Vritra he is therefore described as 'opening the receptacles of the waters,' as 'cleaving the cloud' with his 'far-whirling thunderbolt,' as 'casting the waters 

down to earth.' and 'restoring the sun to the sky.' He is 
in consequence 'the upholder of heaven, earth, and firmament,' and the god 'who has engendered the sun and the dawn.' CHAMBERS'S CYCLOPÆDIA, lndra. 
'Throughout these hymns two images stand out before 
us with overpowering distinctness. On one side is the bright god of the heaven, as beneficent as he is irresistible: on the other the demon of night and of darkness, as false and treachorous as he is malignant... The latter (as his name Vritra, from var, to veil, indicates) is pre-eminently the thief who hides away the rain-clouds... But the myth is yet in too early a state to allow of the definite designations which are brought before us in the conflicts of Zeus with Typhôn and his monstrous progeny, of Apollôn with the Pythôn, of Bellerophôn with Chimaira of Oidipous with the Sphinx, of Hercules with Cacus, of Sigurd with the dragon Fafnir; and thus not only is Vritra known by many names, but he is opposed sometimes by Indra, sometimes by Agni the fire-god, sometimes by Trita, Brihaspati, or other deities; or rather these are all names of one and the same god: 
πολλ•ν •νο¼•των ¼ορφ• ¼•α.
Cox's Mythology of the Aryan Nations. Vol. II. p. 
326.

p. 539 
PAGE 125. 
   And that prized herb whose sovereign power
   Preserves from dark misfortune's hour.   'And yet more medicinal is it than that Moly,   That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave;   He called it Haemony, and gave it me,   And bade me keep it as of sovereign use   'Gainst all enchantment, mildew, blast, or damp,   Or ghastly furies' apparition.' Comus.
The Moly of Homer, which Dierbach considers to have been the Mandrake, is probably a corruption of the Sanskrit Múla a root. 
PAGE 136. 
   True is the ancient saw: the Neem
   Can ne'er distil a honeyed stream.
The Neem tree, especially in the Rains, emits a strong unpleasant smell like that of onions. Its leaves however make an excellent cooling poultice, and the Extract of 

Neem is an admirable remedy for cutaneous disorders. 
PAGE 152. 
   Who of Nisháda lineage came.
The following account of the origin of the Nishádas is 
taken from Wilson's Vishnu Purána, Book I. Chap. 15. 'Afterwards the Munis beheld a great dust arise, and they said to the people who were nigh: "What is this?" And the people answered and said: "Now that the kingdom is without a king, the dishonest men have begun to seize the property of their neighbours. The great dust that you behold, excellent Munis, is raised by troops of clustering robbers, hastening to fall upon their prey." The sages, hearing this, consulted, and together rubbed the thigh of the king (Vena), who had left no offspring, to produce a son. From the thigh, thus rubbed, came forth a being of the complexion of a charred stake, with flattened features like a negro, and of dwarfish stature. "What am I to do," cried he eagerly to the Munis. "Sit down (nishída)," said they. And thence his name was Nisháda. His descendants, the inhabitants of the Vindhyá mountain, great Muni, are still called Nishádas and are characterized by the exterior tokens of depravity.' Professor Wilson adds, in his note on the passage: 'The Matsya says that there were born outcast or barbarous races, Mlechchhas, as 

black as collyrium. The Bhágavata describes an 
individual of dwarfish stature, with short arms and legs, of a complexion as black as a crow, with projecting chin, broad flat nose, red eyes, and tawny hair, whose descendants were mountaineers and foresters. The Padma (Bhúmi Khanda) has a similar deccription; adding to the dwarfish stature and black complexion, a wide mouth, large ears, and a protuberant belly. It also particularizes his posterity as Nishádas, Kirátas, Bhillas, and other barbarians and Mlechchhas, living in woods and on mountains. These passages intend, and do not much exaggerate, the uncouth appearance of the Gonds, Koles, Bhils, and other uncivilized tribes, scattered along the forests and mountains of Central India from Behar to Khandesh, and who are, not improbably, the predecessors of the present occupants of the cultivated portions of the country. They are always very black, ill-shapen, and dwarfish, and have countenances of a very African character.' 
p. 540 
Manu gives a different origin of the Nishádas as the offspring of a Bráhman father and a Súdra mother. See Muir's Sanskrit Texts, Vol. I. p. 481. 
PAGE 157. 

   Beneath a fig-tree's mighty shade,
   With countless pendent shoots displayed.   'So counselled he, and both together went   Into the thickest wood; there soon they chose   The fig-tree: not that kind for fruit renowned,   But such as at this day, to Indians known,   In Malabar or Deccan spreads her arms   Branching so broad and long, that in the ground   The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow   About the mother tree, a pillared shade   High overarched, and echoing walks between.'
Paradise Lost, Book IX, 
PAGE 161. 
   Now, Lakshman, as our cot is made,
   Must sacrifice be duly paid.
The rites performed in India on the completion of a house are represented in modern Europe by the familiar 'house-warming.' 
PAGE 169. 
   I longed with all my lawless will

   Some elephant by night to kill.
One of the regal or military caste was forbidden to kill 
an elephant except in battle. 
   Thy hand has made no Bráhman bleed.
'The punishment which the Code of Manu awards to the slayer of a Brahman was to be branded in the forehead with the mark of a headless corpse, and entirely banished from society; this being apparently commutable for a fine. The poem is therefore in accordance with the Code regarding the peculiar guilt of killing Brahmans; but in allowing a hermit who was not a Divija (twice-born) to go to heaven, the poem is far in advance of the Code. The youth in the poem is allowed to read the Veda, and to accumulate merit by his own as well as his fathers pious acts; whereas the exclusive Code reserves all such privileges to Divijas, invested with the sacred cord.' Mrs. SPEIR'S Life in Ancient India, p. 107. 
PAGE 174. THE PRAISE OF KINGS. 
'Compare this magnificent eulogium of kings and kingly 
government with what Samuel says of the king and his 

authority: And Samuel told all the words of the LORD 
unto the people that asked of him a king. 
And he said, This will be the manner of the king that 
shall reign over you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to be his horsemen: and some shall run before his chariots. 
p. 541 
     And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties, and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instrument of war, and instruments of his chariots. 
     And he will take your daughters to be 
confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers. 
     And he will take your fields, and your vineyards and 
your oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants. 
     And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your 
vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants. 
     And he will take your men-servants, and your maid-
servants, and your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.      He will take the tenth of 

your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.      And ye 
shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall have chosen you. I. Samuel, VIII. 
     In India kingly government was ancient and 
consecrated by tradition: whence to change it seemed disorderly and revolutionary: in Judea theocracy was ancient and consecrated by tradition, and therefore the innovation which would substitute a king was represented as full of dangers.' GORRESIO. 
                         S'ÁLMALÍ PAGE 1:6. 
      According to the Bengal recension S'álmalí appears 
to have been another name of the Vipás'á. S'álmalí may be an epithet signifying rich in Bombax heptaphyllon. The commentator makes another river out of the word. 
                   BHARATH'S RETURN, PAGE 178. 'Two routes from Ayodhyá to Rájagriha or Girivraja are 
described. That taken by the envoys appears to have been the shorter one, and we are not told why Bharath returned by a different road. The capital of the Kekeyas lay to the west of the Vipás'á. Between it and the S'atadru stretched the country of the Bahikas. Upon the remaining portion of the road the two recensions differ. According to that of Bengal there follow towards the 

east the river Indamatí, then the town Ajakála belonging 
to the Bodhi, then Bhulingá, then the river S'aradandá. According to the other instead of the first river comes the Ikshumatí...instead of the first town Abhikála, instead of the second Kulingá, then the second river. According to the direction of the route both the above-mentioned rivers must be tributaries of the S'atadrú...The road then crossed the Yamnuná (Jumna), led beyond that river through the country of the Panchálas, and reached the Ganges at Hástinapura, where the ferry was. Thence it led over the Rámagangá and its eastern tributaries, then over the Gomati, and then in a southern direction along the Málini, beyond which it reached Ayodhyá*. In Bharath's journey the following rivers are passed from west to east: Kutikeshtiká, Uttániká, Kutiká, Kapívatí, Gomatí according to Schlegel, and Hiranyairatí, Uttáriká, Kvtilá, Kapivati, Gomatí according to Gorresio. As these rivers are to be looked for on the east of the Ganges, the first must be the modern K*oh, a small affluent of the Rámagangá, over which the highway cannot have gone as it bends too far to the north. The Uttániká or Uttáriká must be the Rámagangá,the Kutiká or Kutilá its eastern tributary Kos'ilá, the Kapívatí the next tributary which on the maps has different names, Gurra or above Kailas, 
p. 542 
lower down Bhaigu. The Gomatí (Goomtee) retains its 

old name. The Máliní, mentioned only in the envoys' 
journey, must have been the western tributary of the Sarayú now called Chuká.' LASSEN'S Indische Alterthumskunde, Vol. II. P. 524, 
PAGE 183. 
   What worlds await thee, Queen, for this?
'Indian belief divided the universe into several worlds 
(lokáh). The three principal worlds were heaven, earth, and hell. But according to another division there were seven: Bhúrloka or the earth, Bhuvarloka or the space between the earth and the sun, the seat of the Munis, Siddhas, &c., Svarloka or the heaven of Indra between the sun and the polar star, and the seventh Brahmaloka or the world of Brahma. Spirits which reached the last were exempt from being born again.' GORRESIO. 
PAGE 203. 
   When from a million herbs a blaze
   Of their own luminous glory plays.
This mention of lambent flames emitted by herbs at night may be compared with Lucan's description of a similar phenomenon in the Druidical forest near 

Marseilles, (Pharsalia, III. 420.). 
     Non ardentis fulgere incendia silvae.
Seneca, speaking of Argolis, (Thyestes, Act IV), says:-- 
     Tota solet
   Micare flamma silva, et excelsae trabes   Ardent sine igni.
Thus also the bush at Horeb (Exod. II.) flamed, but was not consumed. The Indian explanation of the phenomenon is, that the sun before he sets deposits his rays for the night with the deciduous plants. See Journal of R. As. S. Bengal, Vol. II. p. 339. 
PAGE 219. 
   We rank the Buddhist with the thief.
Schlegel says in his Preface: 'Lubrico vestigio insistit V. 
Cl. *Heerenius*, prof. Gottingensis, in libro suo de commerciis veterum populorum (OPP. Vol. HIST. XII, pag. 129,) dum putat, ex mentione sectatorum Buddhae secundo libro Rameidos iniecta de tempore, quo totum carmen sit conditum, quicquam legitime concludi 

posse.... Sunt versus spurii, reiecti a Bengalis in sola 
commentatorum recensione leguntur. Buddhas quidem mille fere annis ante Christum natun visit: sed post multa demumsecula, odiointernecivo inter Brachmanos et Buddhae sectatores orto, his denique ex India pulsis, fingi potuit iniquissima criminatio, eos animi immortalitatem poenasque et praemia in vita futura negare. Praeterea metrum, quo concinnati sunt hi versus, de quo metro mox disseram, recentiorem aetatem arguit....Poenitet me nunc mei consilii, quod non statim ab initio,...eiecerim cuncta disticha diversis a sloco vulgari metris composita. Metra sunt duo: pariter ambo constant quatuor hemistichiis inter se aequalibus, alterum undenarum syllabarum, alterum duodenarum, hunc in modum: 
p. 543 
V -- v -- | -- v v -- | v -- Vv -- v -- | -- v v -- | v -- v V
Cuius generis versus in primo et secundo Rameidos libro nusquam nisi ad finem capitum apposita inveniuntur, et huic loco unice sunt acommodata, quasi peroratio, lyricis numeris assurgens, quo magis canorae cadant clausulae: sicut musici in concentibus extremis omnium vocum instrumentorumque ictu fortiore aures percellere amant. Igitur disticha illa non ante 

divisionem per capita illatam addi potuerunt: hanc 
autem grammaticis deberi argumento est ipse recensionum dissensus, manifesto inde ortus, quod singuli editores in ea constituenda suo quisque iudicio usi sunt; praeterquam quod non credibile est, poetam artis suae peritum narrationem continuam in membra tam minuta dissecuisse. Porro discolor est dictio: magniloquentia affectatur, sed nimis turgida illa atque effusa, nec sententiarum pondere satis suffulta. Denique nihil fere novi affertur: ampli ficantur prius dicta, rarius aliquid ex capite sequente anticipatur. Si quis appendices hosce legendo trasiliat, sentiet slocum ultimum cum primo capitis proximi apte coagmentatum, nec sine vi quadam inde avulsum. Eiusmodi versus exhibet utraque recensio, sed modo haec modo illa plures paucioresve numero, et lectio interdum magnopere variat.' 
"The narrative of Ráma's exile in the jungle is one of 
the most obscure portions of the Rámáyana, inasmuch as it is difficult to discover any trace of the original tradition, or any illustration of actual life and manners, beyond the artificial life of self-mortification and selfdenial said to have been led by the Brahman sages of olden time. At the same time, however, the story throws some light upon the significance of the poem, and upon the character in which the Brahmanical author desired to represent Ráma; and consequently it deserves more serious consideration than the nature of the 

subject-matter would otherwise seem to imply. 
According to the Rámáyana, the hero Ráma spent more 
than thirteen years of his exile in wandering amongst the different Brahmanical settlements, which appear to have been scattered over the country between the Ganges and the Godáveri; his wanderings extending from the hill of Chitra-kúta in Bundelkund, to the modern town of Nasik on the western side of India, near the source of the Godáveri river, and about seventy-five miles to the north-west of Bombay. The appearance of these Brahmanical hermitages in the country far away to the south of the Raj of Kasala, seems to call for critical inquiry. Each hermitage is said to have belonged to some particular sage, who is famous in Brahmanical tradition. But whether the sages named were really contemporaries of Ráma, or whether they could possibly have flourished at one and the same period, is open to serious question. It is of course impossible to fix with any degree of certainty the relative chronology of the several sages, who are said to have been visited by Ráma; but still it seems tolerably clear that some belonged to an age far anterior to that in which the Rámáyana was composed, and probably to an age anterior to that in which Ráma existed as a real and living personage; whilst, at least, one sage is to be found who could only have existed in the age during which the Rámáyana was produced in its present form. The main proofs of these inferences are as follows. An 

interval of many centuries seems to have elapsed 
between the composition of the Rig-Veda and that of the Rámáyana: a conclusion 
p. 544 
which has long been proved by the evidence of language, and is generally accepted by Sanskrit scholars. But three of the sages, said to have been contemporary with Ráma, namely, Vis'vámitra, Atri and Agastya, are frequently mentioned in the hymns of the Rig-Veda; whilst Válmíki, the sage dwelling at Chitra-kúta, is said to have been himself the composer of the Rámáyana. Again, the sage Atri, whom Ráma visited immediately after his departure from Chitra-kúta, appears in the genealogical list preserved in the Mahá Bhárata, as the progenitor of the Moon, and consequently as the first ancestor of the Lunar race: whilst his grandson Buddha [Budha} is said to have married Ilá, the daughter of Ikhs'váku who was himself the remote ancestor of the Solar race of Ayodhyá, from whom Ráma was removed by many generations. These conclusions are not perhaps based upon absolute proof, because they are drawn from untrustworthy authorities; but still the chronological difficulties have been fully apprehended by the Pundits, and an attempt has been made to reconcile all contradictions by representing the sages to have lived thousands of years, and to have often re-appeared upon earth in different ages widely 

removed from each other. Modern science refuses to 
accept such explanations; and consequently it is impossible to escape the conclusion that if Válmíki composed the Rámáyana in the form of Sanskrit in which it has been preserved, he could not have flourished in the same age as the sages who are named in the Rig-Veda." WHEELER'S History of India, Vol. II, 229. 
PAGE 249. 
   And King Himálaya's Child.
Umá or Párvatí, was the daughter of Himálaya and 
Mená. She is the heroine of Kálidása's Kumára-Sambhava, or Birth of the War-God. 
PAGE 250. 
   Strong Kumbhakarna slumbering deep
   In chains of never-ending sleep.
"Kumbhakarna, the gigantic brother of the titanic Rávan,--named from the size of his ears which could contain a Kumbha or large water-jar--had such an appetite that he used to consume six months' provisions in a single day. Brahmá, to relieve the alarm of the 

world, which had begun to entertain serious 
apprehensions of being eaten up, decreed that the giant should sleep six months at a time and wake for only one day during which he might consume his six months' allowance without trespassing unduly on the reproductive capabilities of the earth." Scenes front the Rámáyan, p. 153, 2nd Edit. 
PAGE 257. 
   Like S'iva when his angry might
   Stayed Daksha's sacrificial rite.
The following spirited version of this old story is from the pen of Mr. W. Waterfield: 
"[This is a favorite subject of Hindú sculpture, 
especially on the temples of Shiva, such as the caves of Elephanta and Ellora. It, no doubt, is an allegory of the contest between the followers of Shiva and the worshippers of the Elements, who observed the old ritual of the Vedas; in which the name of Shiva is never mentioned.} 
p. 545 
Daksha for devotion   Made a mighty feast:

Milk and curds and butter,
   Flesh of bird and beast,
Rice and spice and honey,
   Sweetmeats ghí and gur, 1
Gifts for all the Bráhmans,   Food for all the poor.
At the gates of Gangá 
2
   Daksha held his feast;
Called the gods unto it,   Greatest as the least.
All the gods were gathered
   Round with one accord;All the gods but Umá,   All but Umá's lord.
Umá sat with Shiva
   On Kailása hill:Round them stood the Rudras   Watching for their will.
Who is this that cometh
   Lilting to his lute?All the birds of heaven   Heard his music, mute.

Round his head a garland
   Rich of hue was wreathed:Every sweetest odour   From its blossoms breathed.
'Tis the Muni Nárad;
   'Mong the gods he fares,Ever making mischief   By the tales he bears.
"Hail to lovely Umá!
   Hail to Umá's lord!Wherefore are they absent   For her father's board?
"Multiplied his merits
   Would be truly thrice,Could he gain your favour   For his sacrifice."
Worth of heart was Umá;
   To her lord she spake:--"Why dost thou, the mighty,   Of no rite partake?
"Straight I speed to Daksha
   Such a sight to see:If he be my father,

   He must welcome thee."
Wondrous was in glory
   Daksha's holy rite;Never had creation   Viewed so brave a sight.
Gods, and nymphs, find fathers,
   Sages, Bráhmans, sprites,--Every diverge creature   Wrought that rite of rites.
Quickly then a quaking
   Fell on all from far;Umá stood among them   On her lion car.
"Greeting, gods and sages,
   Greeting, father mine!Work hath wondrous virtue,   Where such aids combine.
"Guest-hall never gathered
   Goodlier company:Seemeth all are welcome.   All the gods but me."
Spake the Muni Daksha,

   Stern and cold his tone:--
"Welcome thou, too, daughter,   Since thou com'st alone.
"But thy frenzied husband
   Suits another shrine;He is no partaker   Of this feast of mine.
"He who walks in darkness
   Loves no deeds of light:He who herds with demons   Shuns each kindly sprite.
"Let him wander naked.--
   Wizard weapons wield,--Dance his frantic measure   Round the funeral field.
"Art thou yet delighted
   With the reeking hide,Body smeared with ashes.   Skulls in necklace tied?
"Thou to love this monster!
   Thou to plead his part!Know the moon and Gangá   Share that faithless heart

"Vainly art thou vying
   With thy rivals' charms.Are not coils of serpents   Softer than thine arms?"
Words like these from Daksha
   Daksha's daughter heard:Then a sudden passion   All her bosom stirred.
Eyes with fury flashing.
   Speechless in her ire,Headlong did she hurl her   'Mid the holy fire.
Then a trembling terror
   Overcame each one,And their minds were troubled   Like a darkened sun;
p. 546
And a cruel Vision,   Face of lurid flame,Umá's Wrath incarnate,   From the altar came.
Fiendlike forms by thousands

   Started from his side,
'Gainst the sacrificers   All their might they plied:
Till the saints availed not
   Strength like theirs to stay,And the gods distracted   Turned and fled away.
Hushed were hymns and chanting,
   Priests were mocked and spurned;Food defiled and scattered;   Altars overturned.--
Then, to save the object
   Sought at such a price,Like a deer in semblance   Sped the sacrifice.
Soaring toward the heavens,
   Through the sky it fled?But the Rudras chasing   Smote away its head.
Prostrate on the pavement
   Daksha fell dismayed:--"Mightiest, thou hast conquered   Thee we ask for aid.

"Let not our oblations
   All be rendered vain;Let our toilsome labour   Full fruition gain."
Bright the broken altars
   Shone with Shiva's form;"Be it so!" His blessing   Soothed that frantic storm.
Soon his anger ceases,
   Though it soon arise;--But the Deer's Head ever   Blazes in the skies."
Indian Ballads and other Poems.URVASÎ, PAGE 286. 
"The personification of Urvasî herself is as thin as that 
of Eôs or Selênê. Her name is often found in the Veda 
as a mere name for the morning, and in the plural number it is used to denote the dawns which passing over men bring them to old age and death. Urvasî is the 
bright flush of light overspreading the heaven before the 
sun rises, and is but another form of the many mythical 
beings of Greek mythology whose names take us back to the same idea or the same root. As the dawn in the 

Vedic hymns is called Urûkî, the far-going (Têlephassa, 
Têlephos), so is she also Uruasî, the wide-existing or wide-spreading; as are Eurôpê, Euryanassa, Euryphassa, and many more of the sisters of Athênê and Aphroditê. As such she is the mother of Vasishtha, the bright being, as Oidipous is the son of Iokastê; and although Vasishtha, like Oidipous, has become a mortal bard or sage, he is still the son of Mitra and Varuna, of night and day. Her lover Purûravas is the counterpart of the Hellenic Polydeukês; but the continuance of her union with him depends on the condition that she never sees him unclothed. But the Gandharvas, impatient of her long sojourn among mortal men resolved to bring her back to their bright home; and Purûravas is thus led unwitingly to disregard her warning. A ewe with two lambs was tied to her couch, and the Gandharvas stole one of them; Urvasî said, "They take away my darling, as if I lived in a land where there is no hero and no man." They stole the second, and she upbraided her husband again. Then Purûravas looked and said, "How can that be a land without heroes or men where I am?" And naked he sprang up; he thought it was too long to put on his dress. Then the Gandharvas sent a flash of lighting, and Urvasî saw her husband naked as by daylight. Then she vanished. "I come back," she said, and went. 'Then he bewailed his vanished love in bitter grief.' Her promise to return was fulfilled, but for a moment only, at the Lotos-lake, and Purûravas in vain beseeches her to tarry longer. 'What shall I do with thy 

p. 547 
speech?' is the answer of Urvasî. 'I am gone like the first 
of the dawns. Purûravas, go home again. I am hard to be caught like the winds.' Her lover is in utter despair; but when he lies down to die, the heart of Urvasî was melted, and she bids him come to her on the last night of the year. On that night only he might be with her; but a son should be born to him. On that day he went up to the golden seats, and there Urvasî told him that the Gandharvas would grant him one wish, and that he must make his choice. 'Choose thou for me,' he said: and she answered, 'Say to them, Let me be one of you.' 
Cox's Mythology of the Aryan Nations. Vol. I. p. 397 PAGE 324. 
   The sovereign of the Vánar race.
"Vánar is one of the most frequently occurring names 
by which the poem calls the monkeys of Ráma's army. Among the two or three derivations of which the word Vánar is susceptible, one is that which deduces it from [Sanskrit: **} which signifies a wood, and thus Vánar would mean a forester, an inhabitant of the wood. I have said elsewhere that the monkeys, the Vánars, whom 

Ráma led to the conquest of Ceylon were fierce 
woodland tribes who occupied the mountainous regions of the south of India, where their descendants may still be seen. I shall hence forth promiscuously employ the word Vánar to denote those monkeys, those fierce combatants of Ráma's army." GORRESIO. 
PAGE 326. 
   No change of hue, no pose of limb
   Gave sign that aught was false in him.   Concise, unfaltering, sweet and clear,   Without a word to pain the ear,   From chest to throat, nor high nor low,   His accents came in measured flow.
Somewhat similarly in The Squire's Tale: 
   'He with a manly voice said his message,    After the 
form used in his language,    Withouten vice of syllable or of letter.    And for his talë shouldë seem the better    Accordant to his wordës was his chere,    As teacheth art of speech them that it lere. 
PAGE 329. 
RÁMA'S ALLIANCE WITH SUGRÍVA. 

"The literal interpretation of this portion of the 
Rámáyana is indeed deeply rooted in the mind of the Hindu. He implicitly believes that Ráma is Vishnu, who became incarnate for the purpose of destroying the demon Rávana: that he permitted his wife to be captured by Rávana for the sake of delivering the gods and Bráhmans from the oppressions of the Rákshasa; and that he ultimately assembled an army of monkeys, who were the progeny of the gods, and led them against the strong-hold of Rávana at Lanká, and delivered the world from the tyrant Rákshasa, whilst obtaining ample revenge for his own personal wrongs. 
p. 548 
One other point seems to demand consideration, namely, the possibility of such an alliance as that which Ráma is said to have concluded with the monkeys. This possibility will of course be denied by modern critics, but still it is interesting to trace out the circumstances which seem to have led to the acceptance, of such a wild belief by the dreamy and marvel loving Hindi. The south of India swarms with monkeys of curious intelligence and rare physical powers. Their wonderful instinct for organization, their attachment to particular localities, their occasional journeys in large numbers over mountains and across rivers, their obstinate assertion of supposed rights, and the ridiculous caricature which they exhibit of all that is animal and 

emotional in man, would naturally create a deep 
impression.... Indeed the habits of monkeys well deserve to be patiently studied; not as they appear in confinement, when much that is revolting in their nature is developed, but as they appear living in freedom amongst the trees of the forest, or in the streets of crowded cities, or precincts of temples. Such a study would not fail to awaken strange ideas; and although the European would not be prepared to regard monkeys as sacred animals he might be led to speculate as to their origin by the light of data, which are at present unknown to the naturalist whose observations have been derived from the menagerie alone. 
Whatever, however, may have been the train of ideas 
which led the Hindú to regard the monkey as a being half human and half divine, there can be little doubt that in the Rámáyana the monkeys of southern India have been confounded with what may be called the aboriginal people of the country. The origin of this confusion may be easily conjectured. Perchance the aborigines of the country may have been regarded as a superior kind of monkeys; and to this day the features of the Marawars, who are supposed to be the aborigines of the southern part of the Carnatic, are not only different from those of their neighbours, but are of a character calculated to confirm the conjecture. Again, it is probable that the army of aborigines may have been accompanied by outlying bands of monkeys impelled 

by that magpie-like curiosity and love of plunder which 
are the peculiar characteristics of the monkey race; and this incident may have given rise to the story that the army was composed of Monkeys." WHEELER'S History of India. Vol. II. pp. 316 ff. 
THE FALL OF BÁLI, PAGE 342. 
"As regards the narrative, it certainly seems to refer to 
some real event amongst the aboriginal tribes: namely, the quarrel between an elder and younger brother for the possession of a Ráj; and the subsequent alliance of Ráma with the younger brother. It is somewhat remarkable that Ráma appears to have formed an alliance with the wrong party, for the right of Báli was evidently superior to that of Sugríva; and it is especially worthy of note that Ráma compassed the death of Báli by an act contrary to all the laws of fair fighting. Again, Ráma seems to have tacitly sanctioned the transfer of Tárá from Báli to Sugríva, which was directly opposed to modern rule, although in conformity with the rude customs of a barbarous age; and it is remarkable that to this day the marriage of both widows and divorced women is practised by the Marawars, or aborigines of the southern Carnatic, contrary to the deeply-rooted prejudice which exists against such unions amongst the Hindús at large." WHEELER'S History of India, Vol. II. 324. 

p. 549 
THE VÁNAR HOST, PAGE 370. 
"The splendid Marutas form the army of Indras, the red-
haired monkeys and bears that of Râmas; and the mythical and solar nature of the monkeys and bears of the Râmâyanam manifests itself several times. The king of the monkeys is a sun-god. Thc ancient king was named Bâlin, and was the son of Indras. His younger brother Sugrívas, he who changes his shape at pleasure (Kâmarúpas), who, helped by Râmas, usurped his throne, is said to be own child of the sun. Here it is evident that the Vedic antagonism between Indras and Vishnus is reproduced in a zoological and entirely apish form. The old Zeus must give way to the new, the moon to the sun, the evening to the morning sun, the sun of winter to that of spring; the young son betrays and overthrows the old one.... Râmas, who treacherously kills the old king of the monkeys, Bâlin, is the equivalent of Vishnus, who hurls his predecessor Indras from his throne; and Sugrívas, the new king of the monkeys resembles Indras when he promises to find the ravished Sítá, in the same way as Vishnus in one of his incarnations finds again the lost vedás. And there are other indications in the Râmâyanam of opposition between Indras and the monkeys who assist Râmas. The great monkey Hanumant, of the reddish colour of gold, has his jaw broken, Indras having struck him with his 

thunderbolt and caused him to fall upon a mountain, 
because, while yet a child, he threw himself off a mountain into the air in order to arrest the course of the sun, whose rays had no effect upon him. (The cloud rises from the mountain and hides the sun, which is unable of itself to disperse it; the tempest comes, and brings flashes of lightning and thunder-bolts, which tear the cloud in pieces.) 
The whole legend of the monkey Hanumant represents 
the sun entering into the cloud or darkness, and coming out of it. His father is said to be now the wind, now the elephant of the monkeys (Kapikunjaras), now Kes'arin, the long-haired sun, the sun with a mane, the lion sun (whence his name of Kes'arinak putrah). From this point of view, Hanumant would seem to be the brother of Sugrívas, who is also the offspring of the sun.... 
All the epic monkeys of the Râmâyanam are described 
in the twentieth canto of the first book by expressions which very closely resemble those applied in the Vedic hymns to the Marutas, as swift as the tempestuous wind, changing their shape at pleasure, making a noise like clouds, sounding like thunder, battling, hurling mountain-peaks, shaking great uprooted trees, stirring up the deep waters, crushing the earth with their arms, making the clouds fall. Thus Bâlin comes out of the cavern as the sun out of the cloud.... 

But the legend of the monkey Hanumant presents 
another curious resemblance to that of Samson. Hanumant is bound with cords by Indrajit, son of Rávanas; he could easily free himself, but does not wish to do so. Rávanas to put him to shame, orders his tail to be burned, because the tail is the part most prized by monkeys.... 
The tail of Hanumant, which sets fire to the city of the 
monsters, is probably a personification of the rays of the morning or spring sun, which sets fire to the eastern heavens, and destroys the abode of tne nocturnal or winter monsters." DE GUBERNATIS, Zoological Mythology, Vol. II. pp. 100 ff. 
p. 550 
"The Jaitwas of Rajputana, a tribe politically reckoned as Rajputs, nevertheless trace their descent from the monkey-god Hanuman, and confirm it by alleging that their princes still bear its evidence in a tail-like prolongation of the spine; a tradition which has probably a real ethnological meaning, pointing out the Jaitwas as of non-Aryan race."  
* TYLOR'S Primitive 
Culture, Vol. I. p. 341. 
PAGE 372. 

The names of peoples occurring in the following s'lokas 
are omitted in the metrical translation: 
'Go to the Brahmamálas, 1 the Videhas, 2 the Málavas, 3 
the Kás'ikos'alas, 4 the Mágadnas, 5 the Pundras, 6 and 
the Angas, 7 and the land of the weavers of silk, and the 
land of the mines of silver, and the hills that stretch into 
the sea, and the towns and the hamlets that are about the top of Mandar, and the Karnaprávaranas, 
8 and the 
Oshthakarnakas, 9 and the Ghoralobamukhas, 10 and the 
p. 551 
swift Ekapádakas 1 and the strong imperishable Eaters 
of Men, and the Kirátas 2 with stiff hair-tufts, men like 
gold and fair to look upon: And the Eaters of Raw Fish, and the Kirátas who dwell in islands, and the fierce Tiger-men 
3 who live amid the waters.' 
PAGE 374. 
'Go to the Vidarbhas 4 and the Rishtikas 5 and the 
Mahishikas,  6 and the Matsyas 7 and Kalingas 8 and the 
Kausikas 9...and the Andhras 10 and the Pundras 11 and 
the Cholas 12 and the Pandyas 13 and the Keralas. 14 'Go 
to the 
p. 552 

Mlechchhas 1 and the Pulindas 2 and the S'úrasenas, 3 
and the Prasthalas and the Bharatas and Madrakas 4 and 
the Kámbojas 5 and the Yavanas 6 and the towns of the 
S'akas 7 and the Varadas. 8 
NORTHERN KURUS, PAGE 378. 
Professor Lassen remarks in the Zeitschrift für die 
Kunde des Morgenlandes, ii. 62: "At the furthest accessible extremity of the earth appears Harivarsha with the northern Kurus. The region of Hari or Vishnu belongs to the system of mythical geography; but the case is different with the Uttara Kurus. Here there is a real basis of geographical fact; of which fable has only taken advantage, without creating it. The Uttara Kurus were formerly quite independent of the mythical system of dvípas, though they were included in it at an early date." Again the same writer says at p. 65: "That the conception of the Uttara Kurus is based upon an actual country and not on mere invention, is proved (1) by the way in which they are mentioned in the Vedas; (2) by the 
p. 553 
existence of Uttara Kuru in historical times as a real country; and (3) by the way in which the legend makes 

mention of that region as the home of primitive 
customs. To begin with the last point the Mahabharata speaks as follows of the freer mode of life which women led in the early world, Book I. verses 4719-22: 'Women were formerly unconfined and roved about at their pleasure, independent. Though in their youthful innocence they abandoned their husbands, they were guilty of no offence; for such was the rule in early times. This ancient custom is even now the law for creatures born as brutes, which are free from lust and anger. This custom is supported by authority and is observed by great rishia, and it is still practiced among the northern Kurus.' 
"The idea which is here conveyed is that of the 
continuance in one part of the world of that original blessedness which prevailed in the golden age. To afford a conception of the happy condition of the southern Kurus it is said in another place M.-Bh, i. 4346. "The southern Kurus vied in happiness with the northern Kurus and with the divine rishis and bards." 
Professor Lassen goes on to say: "Ptolemy (vi. 16.) is 
also acquainted with Uttara Kuru. He speaks of a mountain, a people, and a city called Ottorakorra. Most of the other ancient authors who elsewhere mention this name, have it from him. It is a part of the country which he calls Serica; according to him the city lies twelve degrees west from the metropolis of Sera, and the 

mountain extends from thence far to the eastward. As 
Ptolemy has misplaeed the whole of eastern Asia beyond the Ganges, the relative position which he assigns will guide us better that the absolute one, which removes Oitorakorra so far to the east that a correction is inevitable. According to my opinion the Ottorakorra of Ptolemy must be sought for to the east of Kashgar." Lassen also thinks that Magasthenes had the Uttara Kurus in view when he referred to the Hyperboreans who were fabled by Indian writers to live a thousand years. In his Indian antiquities, (Ind. Alterthumskunde, i. 511, 512. and note,) the same writer concludes that though the passages above cited relative to the Uttara Kurus indicate a belief in the existence of a really existing country of that name in the far north, yet that the descriptions there given are to be taken as pictures of an ideal paradise, and not as founded on any recollections of the northern origin of the Kurus. It is probable, he thinks, that some such reminiscences originally existed, and still survived in the Vedic era, though there is no trace of their existence in latter times." Muia's Santkrit Texts, Vol. II. pp. 336, 337. 
PAGE 428. 
Trust to these mighty Vanars. 
The corresponding passage in the Bengal recension has 
"these silvans in the forms of monkeys, vanaran 

kapirupinah." "Here it manifestly appears," says 
Gorresio, "that these hosts of combatants whom Rama led to the coitqnest of Lanka (Ceylon) the kingdom and seat of the Hamitic race, and whom the poem calls monkeys, were in fact as I have elsewhere observed, inhabitants of the mountainous and southen regions of India, who were wild-looking and not altogether unlike monkeys. They were perhaps the remote ancestors of the Malay races." 
p. 554 
PAGE 481. 
   "Art thou not he who slew of old   The Serpent-Gods, and stormed their hold."
All these exploits of Rávan are detailed in the Uttarakánda, and epitomized in the Appendix. 
PAGE 434. 
   Within the consecrated hall.
The Bráhman householder ought to maintain three 
sacred fires, the Gárhapatya, the Akavaniya and the Dakshina. These three fires were made use of in many 

Brahmanical solemnities, for example in funeral rites 
when the three fires were arranged in prescribed order. 
PAGE 436. 
   Fair Punjikasthalá I met.
"I have not noticed in the Uttara Kánda any story about 
the daughter of Varuna, but the commentator on the text (VI 60, 11) explains the allusion to her thus: 
"The daughter of Varuna was Punjikasthalí. On her 
account, a curse of Brahmá, involving the penalty of death, [was pronounced} on the rape of women." MUIR, Sanskrit Texts, Part IV. Appendix. 
PAGE 452. 
   "Shall no funereal honours grace
   The parted lord of Raghu's race?"
"Here are indicated those admirable rites and those funeral prayers which Professor Müller has described in his excellent work, Die Todtenbestattung bei den Brahmanen, Sítá laments that the body of Ráma will not be honoured with those rites and prayers, nor will the 

Bráhman priest while laying the ashes from the pile in 
the bosom of the earth, pronounce over them those solemn and magnificent words: 'Go unto the earth, thy mother, the ample, wide, and blessed earth.... And do thou, O Earth, open and receive him as a friend with sweet greeting: enfold him in thy bosom as a mother wraps her child in her robes." GORRESIO. 
PAGE 462. 
     Each glorious sign
   That stamps the future queen is mine.
We read in Josephus that Caesar was so well versed in chiromancy that when one day a soi-disant son of Herod had audience of him, he at once detected the impostor because his hand was destitute of all marks of royalty. 
PAGE 466. 
  In battle's wild Gandharva dance.
"Here the commentator explains: 'the battle resembled 
the dance of the Gandharvas,' in accordance with the notion of the Gandharvas entertained in his day. They were regarded as celestial musicians enlivening with 

their melodies 
p. 555 
Indra's heaven and the banquets of the Gods. But the 
Gandharvas before becoming celestial musicians in popular tradition, were in the primitive and true signification of the name heroes, spirited and ardent warriors, followers of Indra, and combined the heroical character with their atmospherical deity. Under this aspect the dance of the Gandharvas may be a very different thing from what the commentator means, and may signify the horrid dance of war." GORRESIO. 
The Homeric expression is similar, "to dance a war-
dance before Ares." 
PAGE 470. 
   By Anaranya'a lips of old.
"The story of Anaranya is told in the Uttara Kanda of 
the Rámáyana....' Anaranya a descendant of Ixváku and King of Ayodhyá, when called upon to fight with Rávana or acknowledge himself conquered, prefers the former alternative; but his army is overcome, and he himself is thrown from his chariot. 

When Rávana triumphs over his prostrate foe, the latter 
says that he has been vanquished not by him but by fate, and that Rávana is only the instrument of his overthrow; and he predicts that Rávana shall one day be slain by his descendant Ráma." Sanskrit Texts, IV., Appendix. 
PAGE 497. 
"With regard to the magic image of Sítá made by 
Indrajit, we may observe that this thoroughly oriental idea is also found in Greece in Homer's Iliad, where Apollo forms an image of Aeneas to save that hero beloved by the Gods: it occurs too in the Aeneid of Virgil where Juno forms a fictitious Aeneas to save Turnus: 
   Tum dea nube cava tenuem sine viribus umbram   In faciem Aeneae (visu mirabile monstrum)   Dardaniis ornat telis; clipeumque jubasque   Divini assimulat capitis; dat inania verba;   Dat sine mente sonum, gressusque effingit euntis.
(Aeneidos, lib X.)" GORRESIO. 
PAGE 489. 

   "To Raghu's son my chariot lend."
"Analogous to this passage of the Rámáyana, where 
Indra sends to Ráma his own chariot, his own charioteer, and his own arms, is the passage in the Aeneid where Venus descending from heaven brings celestial arms to her son Aeneas when he is about to enter the battle: 
   At Venus aethereos inter dea candida nimbos   Dona fereus aderat;...   ...   Arma sub adversa posuit radiantia quercu.   Ille, deae donis et tanto laetus honore,   Expleri nequit, atque oculos per singula volvit,   Miraturque, interque manus et brachia versat   Terribilem cristis galeam flammasque vomentem,   Fatiferumque ensem, loriam ex aere rigentcm.
(Aeneidos, lib. VIII)" GORRESIO. 
p. 556 
PAGE 489. 

   Agastya came and gently spake.
"The Muni or saint Agastya, author of several Vedic 
hymns, was celebrated in Indo-Sanskrit tradition for having directed the first brahmanical settlements in the southern regions of India; and the Mahábhárata gives him the credit of having subjected those countries, expelled the Rákshases. and given security to the solitary ascetics, who were settled there. Hence Agastya was regarded in ancient legend as the conqueror and ruler of the southern country. This tradition refers to the earliest migrations made by the Sanskrit Indians towards the south of India. To Agastya are attributed many marvellous mvthic deeds which adumbrate and veil ancient events; some of which are alluded to here and there in the Rámáyana." GORRESIO. 
The following is the literal translation of the Canto, text 
and commentary, from the Calcutta edition: 
Having found Ráma weary with fighting and buried in 
deep thought, and Rávan standing before him ready to engage in battle, the holy Agastya, who had come to see the battle, approached Ráma and spoke to him thus: "O mighty Ráma, listen to the old mystery by which thou wilt conquer all thy foes in the battle. Having daily repeated the Ádityahridaya (the delighter of the mind of the Sun) the holy prayer which destroys all enemies (of 

him who repeats it) gives victory, removes all sins, 
sorrows and distress, increases life, and which is the blessing of all blessings, worship the rising and splendid sun who is respected by both the Gods and demons, who gives light to all bodies and who is the rich lord of all the worlds, (To the question why this prayer claims so great reverence; the sage answers) Since yonder 
* 
sun is full of glory and all gods reside in him (he being their material cause) and bestows being and the active principle on all creatures by his rays; and since he protects all deities, demons and men with his rays. 
He is Brahmá, 
1 Vishnu, 2 Siva, 3 Skanda, 4 Prajápati, 5 
Mahendra, 6 Dhanada, 7 Kála, 8 Yama, 9 Soma, 10 
Apàm Pati i.e. The lord of waters, Pitris, 11 Vasus, 12 
p. 557 
Sádhyas, 1 Asvins, 2 Maruts, 3 Manu, 4 Váyu, 5 Vahni, 6 
Prajá, 7 Prána, 8 Ritukartá, 9 Prabhákara, 10 (Thou, 11 
art) Aditya, 12 Savitá, 13 Súrya, 14 Khaga, 15 Púshan, 16 
Gabhastimán, 17 Suvarnasadris'a, 18 Bhánu, 19 
Hiranyaretas, 20 Divákara, 21 Haridas'va, 22 
Sahasrárchish, 23 Saptasapti, 24 Marichimán, 25 
Timironmathana, 26 Sambhu, 27 Twashtá, 28 
Mártanda, 29 Ans'umán, 30 Hiranyagarbha, 31 Sis'ira, 32 
Tapana, 33 Ahaskara, 34 Ravi, 35 Agnigarbha, 36 
Aditiputra, 37 Sankha, 38 Sis'iranás'ana, 39 

Vyomanátha, 40 Tamobhedí, 41 Rigyajussámapáraga, 42 
Ghana-* 
p. 558 
vríshti. 1 Apám-Mitra, 2 Vindhyavíthíplavangama, 3 
A'tapí, 4 Mandalí, 5 Mrityu (death), Pingala, 6 
Sarvatápana, 7 Kavi, 8 Vis'va, 9 Mahátejas, 10 Rakta, 11 
Sarvabhavodbhava. 12 The Lord of stars, planets, and 
other luminous bodies, Vis'vabhávana, 13 Tejasvinám-
Tejasvi, 14 Dwádas'átman: 15 I salute thee, I salute thee 
who art the eastern mountain. I salute thee who art the 
western mountain. I salute thee who art the Lord of all the luminous bodies. I salute thee who art the Lord of days. 
I respectfully salute thee who art Jaya, 
16 Jayabhadra, 17 
Haryas'va, 18 O Thou who hast a thousand rays, I 
repeatedly salute thee. I repeatedly and respectfully 
salute thee who art A'ditya, I repeatedly salute thee who art Ugra, 
19 Víra, 20 and Sáranga. 21 I salute thee who 
openest the lotuses (or the lotus of the heart). I salute thee who art furious. I salute thee who art the Lord of Brahmá, S'iva and Vishnu. I salute thee who art the sun, A'dityavarchas, 
22 splendid, Sarvabhaksha, 23 and 
Raudravapush. 24 
I salute thee who destroyest darkness, cold and enemies: 

whose form is boundless, who art the destroyer of the 
ungrateful; who art Deva; 25 who art the Lord of the 
luminous bodies, and who appearest like the heated gold. I salute thee who art Hari, 
26 Vis'vakarman, 27 the 
destroyer of darkness, and who art splendid and Lokasákshin. 
28 Yonder sun destroys the whole of the 
material world and also creates it. Yonder sun dries (all earthly things), destroys them and causes rain with his rays. He wakes when our senses are asleep; and resides within all beings. Youder sun is Agnihotra 
29 and also 
the fruit obtained by the 
p. 559 
performer of Agnihotra. He is identified with the gods, sacrifices, and the fruit of the sacrifices. He is the Lord of all the duties known to the world, if any man, O Rághava, in calamities, miseries, forests and dangers, prays to yonder sun, he is never overwhelmed by distress. 
Worship, with close attention Him the God of gods and 
the Lord of the world; and recite these verses thrice, whereby thou wilt be victorious in the battle. O brave one, thou wilt kill Rávana this very instant." 
Thereupon Agastya having said this went away as he 
came. The glorious Ráma having heard this became free 

from sorrow. Rághava whose senses were under 
control, being pleased, committed the hymn to memory, recited it facing the sun, and obtained great delight. The brave Ráma having sipped water thrice and become pure took his bow, and seeing Rávana, was delighted, and meditated on the sun. 
PAGE 490. 
   His horses poured their burning tears.
I have omitted the Canto from which this line is taken 
because it describes signs and portents similar to those which have occurred in preceding books. But the weeping of the horses is new and is too Homeric to be passed by unnoticed. I borrow the following extract from De Quincey: "The old Homeric superstition which connects horses by the closest sympathy, and even by prescience, with their masters--that superstition which Virgil has borrowed from Homer in his beautiful episode of Mezentins (Rhaebe diu, res si qua diu mortalibus ulla est, Viximus)-- still lingers unbroken in Crete. Horses foresee the fates of riders who are doomed, and express their prescience by weeping in a human fashion. The horses of Achilles weep in "Iliad" xvii, on seeing Automedon their beloved driver prostrate on the ground. With this view of the horse's capacity, it is singular, that in Crete this animal by 

preference should be called το αλογου, the brute, or 
irrational creature. But the word •ππος has, by some 
accident, been lost in the modern Greek. As an instance both of the disparaging name, and of the ennobling superstition, take the following stanza from a Cretan ballad of 1825, written in the modern Greek:-- 
   "Ωντεν εκαβαλλικευε,
     Εκλαιε τ• αλογο του.
   Και τοτεσα το εγνωρισε     Πωσ ειναι • θανατος του"
"Upon which he mounted, and his horse wept; and then 
he saw clearly how this should bode his death." 
Under the same old Cretan faith, Homer in "Iliad" xvii. 
437, says:-- 
                                 "Δ•κρυα δ• σφι
   Θερ¼• κατ• βλεφ•ρων χα¼•δις ••ε ¼υρο¼•νοι•ν   •νι•χοιο ποθ•".
"Tears, scalding tears, trickled to the ground from the 
eyelids of them (the horses), fretting through grief for the loss of their charioteer." 

DE QUINCEY. Homer and the Homeridae. 
p. 560 
PAGE 492. 
RÁVAN'S FUNERAL. "In the funeral ceremonies of India the fire was placed 
on three sides of the pyre; the Dakshina on the south, the Gárhapatya on the west, and the Áhavaníya on the east. The funeral rites are not described in detail here, and it is therefore difficult to elucidate and explain them. The poem assigns the funeral ceremonies of Aryan Brahmans to the Rákshases, a race different from them in origin and religion, in the same way as Homer sometimes introduces into Troy the rites of the Grecian cult." GORRESIO. 
Mr. Muir translates the description of the funeral from 
the Calcutta edition, as follows: "They formed, with Vedic rites, a funeral pile of faggots of sandal wood, with padmaka wood, us'ira grass, and sandal, and covered with a quilt of deer's hair. They then performed an unrivalled obsequial ceremony for the Ráxasa prince, placing the sacrificial ground to the S.E. and the fire in the proper situation. They cast the ladle filled with curds and ghee on the shoulder 
1 of the deceased; he (?) 

placed the car on the feet, and the mortar between the 
thighs. Having deposited all the wooden vessels, the [upper] and lower fire-wood, and the other pestle, in their proper places, they departed. The Ráxasas having then slain a victim to their prince in the manner prescribed in the S'ástras, and enjoined by great rishis, cast [into the fire] the coverlet of the king saturated with ghee. They then, Vibhíshana included, with afflicted hearts, adorned Rávana with perfumes and garlands, and with various vestments, and besprinkled him with fried grain. Vibhíshana having bathed, and having, with his clothes wet, scattered in proper form tila seeds mixed with darbha grass, and moistened with water, applied the fire [to the pile]." 
PAGE 496. 
The following is a literal translation of Brahmá's 
address to Ráma according to the Calcutta edition, text and commentary: 
"O Ráma, how dost thou, being the creator of all the 
world, best of all those who have profound knowledge of the Upanishads and all-powerful as thou art, suffer Sitá to fall in the fire? How dost thou not know thyself as the best of the gods? Thou art one of the primeval Vasus, 
2 and also their lord and creator. Thou art thyself 
the lord and first creator of the three worlds. Thou art the eighth (that is Mahádeva) of the Rudras, 
3 and also 

the fifth 4 of the Sádhyas. 5 (The poet describes Ráma as 
made of the following gods) The As'vinikumáras (the 
twin divine physicians of the gods) are thy ears; the sun and the moon are thy eyes; and thou hast been seen in the beginning and at the end of creation. How dost thou neglect the daughter of Videha (Janaka like a man whose actions are directed by the dictates of nature?" Thus addressed by Indra, Brahmá and 
p. 561 
the other gods, Ráma the descendant of Raghu, lord of the world and the best of the virtuous, spoke to the chief of the gods. "As I take myself to be a man of the name of Ráma and son of Das'aratha, therefore, sir, please tell me who I am and whence have I come." "O thou whose might is never failing," said Brahmá to Kákutstha the foremost of those who thoroughly know Brahmá, "Thou art Náráyana,  
1 almighty, possessed of fortune, and 
armed with the discus. Thou art the boar  2 with one 
tusk; the conqueror of thy past and future foes. Thou art Brahmá true and eternal or undecaying. Thou art Vis'vaksena,  
3 having four arms; Thou art Hrishíkes'a, 
 4 whose bow is made of horn; Thou art Purusha,  5 the 
best of all beings; Thou art one who is never defeated by any body; Thou art the holder of the sword (named Nandaka). Thou art Vishnu (the pervader of all); blue in colour: of great might; the commander of armies; and 

lord of villages. Thou art truth. Thou art embodied 
intelligence, forgiveness, control over the senses, creation, and destruction. Thou art Upendra  
6 and 
Madhusúdana. 7 Thou art the creator of Indra, the ruler 
over all the world, Padmanábha.  8 and destroyer of 
enemies in the battle. The divine Rishis call thee shelter of refugees, as well as the giver of shelter. Thou hast a thousand horns,  
9 a hundred heads.  10 Thou art 
respected of the respected; and the lord and first creator of the three worlds. Thou art the forefather and shelter of Siddhas,  
11 and Sádhyas.  12 Thou all sacrifices; 
Vashfatkára,  13 Omkára.  14 Thou art beyond those who 
are beyond our senses. There is none who knows who thou art and who knows thy beginning and end. Thou art seen in all material objects, in Bráhmans, in cows, and also in all the quarters, sky and streams. Thou hast a thousand feet, a hundred heads, and a thousand eyes. Thou hast borne the material objects and the earth with the mountains; and at the bottom of the ocean thou art seen the great serpent. O Ráma, Thou hast borne the three worlds, gods, Gandharvas, 
15 and demons. I am, O 
Ráma, thy heart; the goddess of learning is thy tongue; the gods are the hairs of thy body; the closing of thy eyelids is called the night: and their opening is called the day. The Vedas are thy Sanskáras. 
16 Nothing can 
exist without thee. The whole world is thy body; the surface of the earth is thy stability. 

p. 562 
O S'rívatsalakshana, fire is thy anger, and the moon is 
thy favour. In the time of thy incarnation named Vámana, thou didst pervade the three worlds with thy three steps; and Mahendra was made the king of paradise by thee having confined the fearful Bali. 
1 Sitá 
(thy wife) is Lakshmí; and thou art the God Vishnu, 2 
Krishna, 3 and Prajápati. To kill Rávan thou hast 
assumed the form of a man; therefore, O best of the virtuous, thou hast completed this task imposed by us (gods). O Ráma, Rávana has been killed by thee: now being joyful (e. i. having for some time reigned in the kingdom of Ayodhyá,) go to paradise. O glorious Ráma, thy power and thy valour are never failing. The visit to thee and the prayers made to thee are never fruitless. Thy devotees will never be unsuccessful. Thy devotees who obtain thee (thy favour) who art first and best of mankind, shall obtain their desires in this world as well as in the next. They who recite this prayer, founded on the Vedas (or first uttered by the sages), and the old and divine account of (Ráma) shall never suffer defeat." 
THE MEETING, PAGE 503. The Bharat-Miláp or meeting with Bharat, is the closing 
scene of the dramatic representation of Ráma's great victory and triumphant return which takes place annually in October in many of the cities of Northern 

India. The Rám-Lalá or Play of Ráma, as the great 
drama is called, is performed in the open air and lasts with one day's break through fifteen successive days. At Benares there are three nearly simultaneous performances, one provided by H. H. the Maharajah of Benares near his palace at Ramnaggur, one by H. H. the Maharajah of Vizianagram near the Missionary settlement at Sigra and at other places in the city, and one by the leading gentry of the city at Chowká Ghát near the College. The scene especially on the great day when the brothers meet is most interesting: the procession of elephants with their gorgeous howdahs of silver and gold and their magnificently dressed riders with priceless jewels sparkling in their turbans, the enthusiasm of the thousands of spectators who fill the streets and squares, the balconies and the housetops, the flowers that are rained down upon the advancing car, the wild music, the shouting and the joy, make an impression that is not easily forgotten. 
   Still on his head, well trained in lore   Of duty, Ráma's shoes he bore.
Ráma's shoes are here regarded as the emblems of royalty or possession. We may compare the Hebrew "Over Edom will I cast forth my shoe." A curiously similar passage occurs in LYSCHANDER'S Chronicon Greenlandiæ Rhythmicon: 

   "Han sendte til Irland sin skiden skoe,
   Og böd den Konge. Som der monne boe,   Han skulde dem hæderlig bære   Pan Juuledag i sin kongelig Pragt,   Og kjende han havde sit Rige og Magt   Af Norges og Quernes Herre."
p. 563 
   He sent to Ireland his dirty shoes,   And commanded the king who lived there   To wear them with honour   On Christmas Day in his royal state,   And to own that he had his kingdom and power   From the Lord of Norway and the Isles.   Notes & Queries, March 30, 1872.
I end these notes with an extract which I translate from Signor Gorreslo's Preface to the tenth volume of his Rámáyan, and I take this opportunity of again thankfully acknowledging my great obligations to this eminent S'anskritist from whom I have so frequently borrowed. As Mr. Muir has observed, the Bengal recension which Signor Gorresio has most ably edited is throughout an admirable commentary on the genuine Rámáyan of northern India, and I have made constant 

reference to the faithful and elegant translation which 
accompanies the text for assistance and confirmation in difficulties: 
"Towards the southern extremity and in the island of 
Lanká (Ceylon) there existed undoubtedly a black and ferocious race, averse to the Aryans and hostile to their mode of worship: their ramifications extended through the islands of the Archipelago, and some traces of them remain in Java to this day. 
The Sanskrit-Indians, applying to this race a name 
expressive of hatred which occurs in the Vedas as the name of hostile, savage and detested beings, called it the Rákshas race: it is against these Rákshases that the expedition of Ráma which the Rámáyan celebrates is directed. The Sanskrit-Indians certainly altered in their traditions the real character of this race: they attributed to it physical and moral qualities not found in human nature; they transformed it into a race of giants; they represented it as monstrous, hideous, truculent, changing forms at will, blood-thirsty and ravenous, just as the Semites represented the races that opposed them as impious, horrible and of monstrous size. But notwithstanding these mythical exaggerations, which are partly due to the genius of the Aryans so prone to magnify everything without measure, the Rámáyan in the course of its epic narration has still preserved and noted here and there some traits and peculiarities of the 

race which reveal its true character. It represents the 
Rákshases as black of hue, and compares them with black clouds and masses of black collyrium; it attributes to them curly woolly hair and thick lips, it depicts them as loaded with chains, collars and girdles of gold, and the other bright ornaments which their race has always loved, and in which the kindred races of the Soudan still delight. It describes them as worshippers of matter and force. They are hostile to the religion of the Aryans whose rites and sacrifices they disturb and ruin...Such is the Rákshas race as represented in the Rámáyan; and the war of the Aryan Ráma forms the subject of the epic, a subject certainly real and historical as far as regards its substance, but greatly exaggerated by the ancient myth. In Sanskrit-Indian tradition are found traces of another struggle of the Aryans with the Rákshas races, which preceded the war of Ráma. According to some pauranic legends, Kárttavírya a descendant of the royal tribe of tha Yádavas, contemporary with Parasurama and a little anterior to Ráma, attacked Lanká and took Rávan prisoner. This well shows how ancient and how deeply rooted in the Aryan race is the thought of this war which the Rámáyan celebrates. 
p. 564 
"But," says an eminent Indianist  1 whose learning I 
highly appreciate, "the Rámáyan if an allegorical epic, 

and no precise and historical value can be assigned to it. 
Sítá signifies the furrow made by the plough, and under this symbolical aspect has already appeared honoured with worship in the hymns of the Rig-veda; Ráma is the bearer of the plough (this assertion is entirely gratuitous; these two allegorical personages represented agriculture introduced to the southern regions of India by the race of the Kosalas from whom Ráma was descended; the Rákshases on whom he makes war are races of demons and giants who have little or nothing human about them; allegory therefore predominates in the poem, and the exact reality of an historical event must not be looked for in it." Such is Professor Weber's opinion. If he means to say that mythical fictions are mingled with real events, 
Forsan in alcun vero suo arco percuote, 
as Dante says, and I fully concede the point. The 
interweaving of the myth with the historical truth belongs to the essence, so to speak, of the primitive epopeia. If Sítá is born, as the Rámáyan feigns, from the furrow which King Janak opened when he ploughed the earth, not a whit more real is the origin of Helen and Aeneas as related in Homer and Virgil, and if the characters in the Rámáyan exceed human nature, and in a greater degree perhaps than is the case in analogous epics, this springs in part from the nature of the subject and still more from the symbol-loving genius of the 

orient. Still the characters of the Rámáyan, although 
they exceed more or less the limits of human nature, act notwithstanding in the course of the poem, speak, feel, rejoice and grieve according to the natural impulse of human passions. But if by saying that the Rámáyan is an allegorical epic, it is meant that its fundamental subject is nothing but allegory, that the war of the Aryan Ráma against the Rákshas race is an allegory, that the conquest of the southern region and of the island of Lanká is an allegory, I do not hesitate to answer that such a presumption cannot be admitted and that the thing is in my opinion impossible. Father Paolíno da S. Bartolommeo, 
2 had already, together 
with other strange opinions of his own on Indian matters, brought forward a similar idea, that is to say that the exploit of Ráma which is the subject of the Rámáyan was a symbol and represented the course of the sun: thus he imagined that Brahmá was the earth, Vishnu the water, and that his avatárs were the blessings brought by the fertilizing waters, etc. But such ideas, born at a time when Indo-sanskrit antiquities were enveloped in darkness, have been dissipated by the light of new studies. How could an epic so dear in India to the memory of the people, so deeply rooted for many centuries in the minds of all, so propagated and diffused through all the dialects and languages of those region, which had become the source of many dramas which are still represented in India, which is itself represented every year with such magnificence and to such crowds 

of people in the neighbourhood of Ayodhyá, a poem 
welcomed at its very birth with such favour, as the legend relates, that the recitation of it by the first wandering Rhapsodists has consecrated and made famous all the places celebrated 
p. 565 
by them, and where Ráma made a shorter or longer stay, how, I ask, could such an epic have been purely allegorical? How, upon a pure invention, upon a simple allegory, could a poem have been composed of about fifty thousand verses, relating with such force and power the events, and giving details with such exactness? On a theme purely allegorical there may easily be composed a short mythical poem, as for example a poem on Proserpine or Psyche: but never an epic so full of traditions and historical memories, so intimately connected with the life of the people, as the Rámáyan. 
1 Excessive readiness to find allegory 
whenever some traces of symbolism occur, where the myth partly veils the historical reality, may lead and often has led to error. What poetical work of mythical times could stand this mode of trial? could there not be made, or rather has there not been made a work altogether allegorical, out of the Homeric poems? We have all heard of the ingenious idea of the anonymous writer, who in order to prove how easily we may pass beyond the truth in our wish to seek and find allegory 

everywhere, undertook with keen subtlety to prove that 
the great personality of Napoleon I. was altogether allegorical and represented the sun. Napoleon was born in an island, his course was from west to east, his twelve marshals were the twelve signs of the zodiac, etc. 
I conclude then, that the fundamental theme of the 
Rámáyan, that is to say the war of the Aryan Ráma against the Rákshases, an Hamitic race settled in the south, ought to be regarded as real and historical as far as regards its substance, although the mythic element intermingled with the true sometimes alters its natural and genuine aspect. 
How then did the Indo-Sanskrit epopeia form and 
complete itself? What elements did it interweave in its progress? How did it embody, how did it clothe the naked and simple primitive datum? We must first of all remember that the Indo-European races possessed the epic genius in the highest degree, and that they alone in the different regions they occupied produced epic poetry...But other causes and particular influences combined to nourish and develop the epic germ of the Sanskrit-Indians. Already in the Rig-veda are found hymns in which the Aryan genius preluded, so to speak, to the future epopeia, in songs that celebrated the heroic deeds of Indra, the combats and the victories of the tutelary Gods of the Aryan races over enemies secret or 

open, human or superhuman, the exploits and the 
memories of ancient heroes. More recently, at certain solemn occasions, as the very learned A. Weber remarks, at the solemnity, for example of the As'vamedha of sacrifice of the horse, the praises of the king who ordained the great rite were sung by bards and ministrels in songs composed for the purpose, the memories of past times were recalled and honourable mention was made of the just and pious kings of old. In the Bráhmanas, a sort of prose commentaries annexed to the Vedas, are found recorded stories and legends which allude to historical events of the past ages, to ancient memories, and to mythical events. Such popular legends which the Bráhmanas undoubtedly gathered from tradition admirably suited the epic tissue with which they were interwoven by successive hands......Many and various mythico-historical traditions suitable for epic development, were diffused among the Aryan races, those for example which are related 
p. 566 
in the four chapters containing the description of the earth, the Descent of the Ganges, etc. The epic genius however sometimes created beings of its own and gave body and life to ideal conceptions. Some of the persons in the Rámáyan must be, in my opinion, either personifications of the forces of nature like those which are described with such vigour in the Sháhnámah, or if 

not exactly created, exaggerated beyond human 
proportions; others, vedic personages much more ancient than Ráma, were introduced into the epic and woven into its narrations, to bring together men who lived in different and distant ages, as has been the case in times nearer to our own, in the epics, I mean, of the middle ages. 
In the introduction I have discussed the antiquity of the 
Rámáyan; and by means of those critical and inductive proofs which are all that an antiquity without precise historical dates can furnish I have endeavoured to establish with all the certainy that the subject admitted, that the original composition of the Rámáyan is to be assigned to about the twelfth century before the Christian era. Not that I believe that the epic then sprang to life in the form in which we now possess it; I think, and I have elsewhere expressed the opinion, that the poem during the course of its rhapsodical and oral propagation appropriated by way of episodes, traditions, legends and ancient myths......But as far as regards the epic poem properly so called which celebrates the expedition of Ráma against the Rákshases I think that I have sufficiently shown that its origin and first appearance should be placed about the twelfth century B C.; nor have I hitherto met with anything to oppose this chronological result, or to oblige me to rectify or reject it......But an eminent philologist already quoted, deeply versed in these studies, A. Weber, has expressed 

in some of his writings a totally different opinion; and 
the authority of his name, if not the number and cogency of his arguments, compels me to say something on the subject. From the fact or rather the assumption that Megasthenes  
1 who lived some time in India has 
made no mention either of the Mahábhárat or the Rámáyan Professor Weber argues that neither of these poems could have existed at that time; as regards the Rámáyan, the unity of its composition, the chain that binds together its different parts, and its allegorical character, show it, says Professor Weber, to be much more recent than the age to which I have assigned it, near to our own era, and according to him, later than the Mahábhárat. As for Megasthenes it should be observed, that he did not write a history of India, much less a literary history or anything at all resembling one, but a simple description, in great part physical, of India: whence, from his silence on literary matters to draw inferences regarding the history of Sanskrit literature would be the same thing as from the silence of a geologist with respect to the literature of a country whose valleys, mountains, and internal structure he is exploring, to conjecture that such and such a poem or history not mentioned by him did not exist at his time. We have only to look at the fragments of Megasthenes collected and published by Schwanbeck to see what was the nature and scope of his Indica.................. But only a few fragments of Megasthenes are extant; and to pretend that they should be argument and proof enough 

to judge the antiquity of a poem is to press the laws of 
criticism too far. To Professor Weber's argument as to the more or 
p. 567 
less recent age of the Rámáyan from the unity of its composition, I will make one sole reply, which is that if unity of composition were really a proof of a more recent age, it would be necessary to reduce by a thousand years at least the age of Homer and bring him down to the age of Augustus and Virgil; for certainly there is much more unity of composition, a greater accord and harmony of parts in the Iliad and the Odyssey than in the Rámáyan. But in the fine arts perfection is no proof of a recent age: while the experience and the continuous labour of successive ages are necessary to extend and perfect the physical or natural sciences, art which is spontaneous in its nature can produce and has produced in remote times works of such perfection as later ages have not been able to equal." 
Footnotes
516:1 The Academy, Vol. III., No 43, contains an able 

and interesting notice of this work from the pen of the 
Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Cambridge: 'The Uttarakánda.' Mr. Cowell remarks, 'bears the same relation to the Rámáyana, as the Cyclic poems to the Iliad. Just as the Cypria of Stasinus, the Aethiopis of Arctinus, and the little Iliad of Lesches completed the story of the 
p. 517 Iliad, and not only added the series of 
events which preceded and followed it, but also founded episodes of their own on isolated allusions in Homer, so the Uttarakánda is intended to complete the Rámáyana, and at the same time to supplement it by intervening episodes to explain casual allusions or isolated incidents which occur in it. Thus the early history of the giant Rávana and his family fills nearly forty Chapters, and we have a full account of his wars with the gods and His conquest of Lanká, which all happened long before the action of the poem commences, just as the Cypria narrated the birth and earlv history of Helen, and the two expeditions of the Greeks against Troy; and the latter chapters continue the history of the hero Ráma after his triumphant return to his paternal kingdom, and the poem closes with his death and that of his brothers, and the founding by their descendants of various kingdoms in different parts of India.'
518:1 Muir, Sanskrit Texts, Part IV., pp. 414 ff.
519:1 MUIR, Sanskrit Texts, Part IV, 391, 392.

520:1 See Academy, III., 43.
521:1 Academy, Vol. III., No. 43.
522:1 E. B. Cowell. Academy, No. 48. The story of 
Sítá's banishment will be found roughly translated from 
the Raghurans'a, in the Additional Notes.
522:2 E. B. Cowell. Academy, Vol, III, No. 48.
523:1 Muir, Sanskrit Texts, Part IV., Appendix.
545:1 Ghí: clarified butter. Gur: molasses.
545:2 Haridwar (Anglicè Hurdwar) where the Ganges 
enters the plain country.
550:* Campbell in 'Journ. As. Soc. Bengal,' 1866, Part ii, p. 182; Latham, 'Descr. Eth.' Vol. ii. p. 456; 
Tod,'Annals of Rajasthan,' Vol. i. p. 114.
550:1 Said by the commentator to be an eastern people 
between the Himálayan and Vindhyan chains.
550:2 Videha was a district in the province of Behar, the ancient Mithilá or the modern Tirhoot.

550:3 The people of Malwa.
550:4 "The Kás'ikos'alas are a central nation in the 
Váyu Purána. The Rámáyana places them in the east. 
The combination indicates the country between Benares and Oude.... Kos'ala is a name variously applied. Its earliest and most celebrated application is to the country on the banks of the Sarayú, the kingdom of Ráma, of which Ayodhyá was the capital.... In the Mahábhárata we have one Kos'ala in the east and another in the south, besides the Prák-Kos'alas and Uttara Kos'alas in the east and north. The Puránas place the Kos'alas amongst the people on the back of Vindhya; and it would appear from the Váyu that Kus'a the son of Ráma transferred his kingdom to a more central position; he ruled over Kos'ala at his capital of Kús'asthali of Kus'avatí, built upon the Vindhyan precipices." WILSON'S Vishnu Púrana, Vol. II. pp. 157, 172.
550:5 The people of south Behar.
550:6 The Pundras are said to be the inhabitants of the 
western provinces of Bengal. "In the 
Aitareyabráhmana, VII. 18, it is said that the elder sons of Vis'vamitra were cursed to become progenitors of most abject races, such as Andhras, Pundras, S'abaras, Pulindas, and Mútibas." WILSON'S Vishnu Purána Vol. II. 170.

550:7 Anga is the country about Bhagulpore, of which 
Champá was the capital.
550:8 A fabulous people, 'men who use their ears as a covering.' So Sir John Maundevile says: "And in 
another Yle ben folk that han gret Eres and long, that hangen down to here knees,' and Pliny, lib, iv. c. 13: "In quibus nuda alioquin corpora praegrandes ipsorum 
aures tota contegunt." Strabo calls them •νωτ•κοιτοι'. 
Isidore calls them Panotii.
550:9 'Those whose ears hang down to their lips.'
550:10 'The Iron-faces.'
551:1 'The One-footed.' 
"In that Contree," says Sir Jhon Maundevile, "ben folk, 
that han but o foot and thei gon so fast that it is marvaylle: and the foot is so large that it schadeweth alle the Body azen the Sonne, when thei wole lye and rest hem." So Pliny, Natural History, lib. vii. c. 2: speaks of Hominumn gens...singulis cruribus, mirae pernicitatis ad saltum; eosdemque Sciopodas vocari, quod in majori aestu, humi jacentes resupini, umbrâ se pedum protegant." 

These epithets are, as Professor Wilson remarks, 
"exaggerations of national ugliness, or allusions to peculiar customs, which were not literally intended, although they may have furnished the Mandevilles of ancient and modern times." Vishnu Purána, Vol. II. p. 162.
551:2 The Kirrhadae of Arrian: a general name for 
savage tribes living in woods and mountains
551:3 Said by the commentator to be half tigers half men.
551:4 The kingdom seems to have corresponded with the greater part of Berar and Khandesh.
551:5 The Bengal recension has Kishikas, and places them both in the south and the north.
551:6 The people of Mysore.
551:7 "There are two Matsyas, one of which, according to the Yantra Samráj, is identifiable with Jeypoor. In the 
Digvijaya of Nakula he subdues the Matsyas further to the west, or Gujerat." WILSON'S Vishnu Purána, Vol. II. 158. Dr. Hall observes: "In the Mahábhárata Sabhá-parwan, 1105 and 1108, notice is taken of the king of Matsya and of the Aparamatsyas; and, at 1082, the 

Matsyas figure as an eastern people. They are placed 
among the nations of the south in the Rámáyana Kishkindhá-kánda, XLI., II, while the Bengal recension, Kishkindhá-kánda, XLlV., 12, locates them in the north."
551:8 The Kalingas were the people of the upper part of 
the Coromandel Coast, well known, in the traditions of 
the Eastern Archipelago, as Kling. Ptolemy has a city in that part, called Caliga; and Pliny Calingae proximi mari." WILSON'S Vishnu Purána, Vol. II. l56, Note.
551:9 The Kaus'ikas do not appear to be identifiable.
551:10 The Andhras probably occupied the modem 
Telingana.
551:11 The Pundras have already been mentioned in Canto XL.
551:12 The inhabitants of the lower part of the Coromandel Coast; so called, after them, Cholamandala.
551:13 A people in the Deccan.
551:14 The Keralas were the people of Malabar proper.

552:1 A generic term for persons speaking any language 
but Sanskrit and not conforming to the usual Hindu 
institutions.
552:2 "Pulinda is applied to any wild or barbarous tribe. 
Those here named are some of the people of the deserts 
along the Indus; but Pulindas are met with in many other positions, especially in the mountains and forests across Central India, the haunts of the Bheels and Gonds. So Ptolemy places the Pulindas along the banks of the Narmadá, to the frontiers of Larice, the Látá or Lár of the Hindus,--Khandesh and part of Gujerat." WILSON'S Vishnu Purána, Vol. II. 159, Note. 
Dr. Hall observes that "in the Bengal recension of the 
Rámáyana the Pulindas appear both in the south and in the north. The real Rámáyana K.-k., XLIII., speaks of the northern Pulindas."
552:3 The S'úrasenas were the inhabitants of Mathurá, 
the Suraseni of Arrian.
552:4 These the Mardi of the Greeks and the two preceding tribes appear to have dwelt in the north-west 
of Hindustan.
552:5 The Kámbojas are said to be the people of 
Arachosia. They are always mentioned with the north-

western tribes.
552:6 "The term Yavanas, although, in later times, 
applied to the Mohammedans, designated formerly the 
Greeks.... The Greeks were known throughout Western 
Asia by the term Yavan, or Ion, Ι•ονες ; the ••• of the 
Hindus.... That the Macedonian or Bactrian Greeks were most usually intended is not only probable from their position and relations with India, but from their being usually named in concurrence with the north-western tribes, Kámbojas, Daradas, Páradas, Báhlíkas, S'akas &c., in the Rámáyana. Mahábhárata, Puránas, Manu, and in various poems and plays." WILSON'S Vishnu Purána Vol. II. p. 181, Note.
552:7 These people, the Sakai and Sacae of classical 
writers, the Indo-Scythians of Ptolemy, extended, about 
the commencement of our era, along the west of India, from the Hindu Kosh to the mouths of the Indus.
552:8 The corresponding passage in the Bengal 
recension has instead of Varadas Daradas the Dards or 
inhabitants of the modern Dardistan along the course of the Indus, above the Himálayas, just before it descends to India.
556:* From the word yonder it would appear that the 
prayer is to be repeated at the rising of the Sun.

556:1 The creator of the world and the first of the Hindu 
triad.
556:2 He who pervades all beings; or the second of the Hindu triad who preserves the world.
556:3 The bestower of blessings; the third of the Hindu triad and the destroyer of the world
556:4 A name of the War-God; also one who urges the senses to action.
556:5 The lord of creatures; or the God of sacrifices.
556:6 A name of the King of Gods; also all-powerful.
556:7 The giver of wealth. A name of the God of riches.
556:8 One who directly urges the mental faculties to action.
556:9 One who moderates the senses, also the God of the regions of the dead.
556:10 One who produces nectar (amrita) or one who is always possessed of light; or one together with Umá 

(Ardhanárís'vara).
556:11 The names or spirits of departed ancestors.
556:12 Name of a class of eight Gods, also wealthy.
557:1 They who are to be served by Yogís; or a class of 
Gods named Sádhyas.
557:2 The two physicians of the Gods: or they who pervade all beings.
557:3 They who are immortal; or a class of Gods forty-nine in number.
557:4 Omniscient; or the first king of the world.
557:5 He that moves; life; or the God of wind.
557:6 The God of fire.
557:7 Lord of creatures.
557:8 One who prolongs our lives.
557:9 The material cause of knowledge and of the 

seasons.
557:10 One who shines. The giver of light.
557:11 The hymn entitled the Ádityahridaya begins 
from this verse and the words, thou art, are understood 
in the beginning of this verse.
557:12 One who enjoys all (pleasurable) objects; The 
son of Aditi, the lord of the solar disk.
557:13 One who creates the world i.e. endows beings with life or soul, and by his rays causes rain and thereby 
produces corn.
557:14 One who urges the world to action or puts the 
world in motion, who is omnipresent.
557:15 One who walks through the sky; or pervades the soul.
557:16 One who nourishes the world i. e. is the supporter.
557:17 One having rays (Gabhasti) or he who is possessed of the all-pervading goddess Lakshmí.

557:18 One resembling gold.
557:19 One who is resplendent or who gives light to 
other objects.
557:20 One whose seed (Retas) is gold; or quicksilver, the material cause of gold.
557:21 One who is the cause of day.
557:22 One whose horses are of tawny colour; or one who pervades the whole space or quarters.
557:23 One whose knowledge is boundless or who has a thousand rays.
557:24 One who urges the seven (Pránas) that is the two eyes, the two ears, the nostrils and the organ of speech, 
or whose chariot, is drawn by seven horses.
557:25 Vide Gabhastimán.
557:26 One who destroys darkness, or ignorance.
557:27 One from whom our blessings or the enjoyments 
of Paradise come.

557:28 The architect of the gods; or one who lessens the 
miseries of our birth and death.
557:29 One who gives life to the lifeless world.
557:30 One who pervades the internal and external worlds; or one who is resplendent.
557:31 He who is identified with the Hindu triad, i.e. the creator (Brahmá) the supporter (Vishnu) and the 
destroyer (S'iva)
557:32 Cold or good natured. He is so called because he 
allays the three sorts of pain.
557:33 One who is the lord of all.
557:34 Vide Divákara.
557:35 One who teaches Brahmá and others the Vedas.
557:36 One from whom Rudra the destroyer or the third of the Hindu triad springs.
557:37 One who is knowable through Aditi i.e. the eternal Brahmavidyá.

557:38 Great happiness or the sky
557:39 The destroyer of cold or stupidity.
557:40 The Lord of the sky.
557:41 Vide Timironmathana.
557:42 One who is known through the Upanishads.
558:1 He who is the cause of heavy rain.
558:2 He who is a friend to the good, or who is the 
cause of water.
558:3 One who moves in the solar orbit.
558:4 One who determines the creation of the world; or who is possessed of heat.
558:5 One who has a mass of rays; or who has Kaustubha and other precious stones as his ornaments.
558:6 He who urges all to action; or who is yellow in colour.

558:7 One who is the destroyer of all.
558:8 One who is omniscient; or a poet.
558:9 One who is identified with the whole world.
558:10 One who is of huge form.
558:11 One who pleases all by giving nourishment; or 
who is red in colour.
558:12 One who is the cause of the whole world.
558:13 One who protects the whole world.
558:14 The most glorious of all that are glorious.
558:15 One who is identical with the twelve months.
558:16 One who gives victory over all the worlds to those who are faithfully devoted to him; or the porter of 
Brahmá, named Jaya.
558:17 One who is identical with the blessing which 
can be obtained by conquering all the worlds; or with 
the porter of Brahmá named Jayabhadra.

558:18 One who has Hanúmán as his conveyance.
558:19 One who controls the senses; or is furious with 
those who are not his devotees.
558:20 He who is free in moving the senses; or urges all beings to action.
558:21 He who can be known through the Pranava (the mystical Om-kára.) 
558:22 One who is the knowledge of Brahmá.
558:23 One who devours all things.
558:24 He who is the destroyer of all pains; and of love, and hate, the causes of pain; and ignorance which is the 
cause of love and hate.
558:25 One who is bliss; or the mover.
558:26 One who destroys ignorance and its effects.
558:27 The doer of all actions.
558:28 One who beholds the universe; who is a witness 

of good and bad actions.
558:29 Sacrifice of the five sensual fires.
560:1 According to Ápastamba (says the commentator) 
it should have been placed on the nose: this must 
therefore have been done in conformity with some other Sútras."
560:2 A class of eight gods.
560:3 A class of eleven gods called Rudras.
560:4 Named Viryaván.
560:5 A class of divine devotees named Sádhyas.
561:1 One who resides in the water.
561:2 The third incarnation of Vishnu, that bore the 
earth on his tusk.
561:3 One whose armies are everywhere.
561:4 One who controls the senses.

561:5 He who resides in the heart, or who is full, or all-
pervading.
561:6 Vámana, or the Dwarf incarnation of Vishnu.
561:7 The killer of Madhu, a demon.
561:8 He from whose navel, the lotus, from which Brahmá was born, springs.
561:9 He who has a thousand horns. The horns are here the Sákhás of the Sáma-veda.
561:10 One who has a hundred heads. The heads are here meant to devote a hundred commandments of the 
Vedas.
561:11 Siddhas are those who have already gained the 
summit of their desires.
561:12 Sádhyas are those that are still trying to gain the summit.
561:13 A mystic syllable uttered in Mantras.
561:14 A mystic syllable made of the letters • • • which respectively denote Brahmá, Vishnu, and S'iva.

561:15 A class of divine gods.
561:16 Sanskáras are those sacred writings through 
which the divine commands and prohibitions are known.
562:1 Bali. a demon whom Vámana confined in Pátála.
562:2 Vishnu, the second of the Hindu triad.
562:3 Krishna, (black coloured) one of the ten incarnations of Vishnu.
564:1 A. Weber, Akademische Vorlesungen, p. 181.
564:2 Systema brahmanicum, liturgicum, mythologicum, civile, exmonumentis Indicis, etc.
565:1 Not only have the races of India translated or epitomized it, but foreign nations have appropriated it 
wholly or in part, Persia, Java, and Japan itself.
566:1 In the third century B. C.
Next: Index of Principal Names

Sacred Texts  Hinduism  Index  Previous  Next  
p. 568
INDEX OF PRINCIPAL NAMES
A.
Abhijit, 24.
Abhikála, 176.Abhíra, 444.Abravanti, 374.
Aditi, 31, 57, 58, 125, 201, 245, 246.
Adityas, 246, 403.
Agastya, 5, 9, 40, 132, 151, 239, 240, 242, 244, 262, 265, 280, 375, 480, 491, 500.Ágneya, 178.
Agni, 28, 74, 109, 132, 240, 243, 276.
Agnivarna, 82, 220.
Agniketu, 433 note, 459.Ahalyá, 60, 61, 62.Ailadhána, 178.
Air, 2, 28, 203.
Airávat, 14, 110, 178, 246, 256, 267, 335, 399, 402, 
415, 429, 437, 472.Aja, 82, 220, 465.Ájas, 270, 271.
Akampan, 265, 266, 468, 481.

Aksha, 6, 420, 469, 471.
Akurvati, 178.Alaka, 203 note.Alambúshá, 59, 198, 199.Alarka, 104, 107.Amarávati, 13 203 note, 286.Ambarisha, 72, 73, 74, 82, 220.Amúrtarajas, 46.Anala, 455 note.Analá, 245, 246.Ananta, 373.Anaranya, 81, 219, 470.Anasúyá, 9, 226, 227, 228.Andhak, 264.Andhras, 549.Anga, 38.Angad, 342, 348, 350, 352 ff., 363, 364 note, 367, 374, 379 ff, 391, 402, 425 ff., 439, 442, 445, 448, 456, 458, 459, 475, 479 ff, 505.Angas, 15, 18, 19, 21, 102.Angiras, 133, 245.Anjan, 14, 368, 369.Anjaná, 392.Ans'udhána, 179.Ansumán, 50, 53, 56, 82, 220.Anuhláda, 370.Aparparyat, 178.Apartála, 175.Apsarases, 57, 198, 199, 229, 378.

Aptoryám, 24.
Arishta, 424, 425.Arishtanemi, 49, 245, 392.Arjun, 86.Arjuna, 518.Arthasádhak, 14.Arun, 246,Arundhatí, 19, 244, 413.Aryaman, 124.Áryan, 92.Asamanj, 50, 53, 82, 138, 220.Asit, 81, 219.As'ok, 14, 175.As'oka, 6, 10, 101, 205, 278, 296, 297, 300, 318, 321, 357, 403, 444, 452, 456.Asta, 377, 379 note.Asurs, 57, 58, 380, 381, 387, 394, 407, 413, 420.As'vagríva, 246.As'vamedh, 29, 236 note.As'vapati, 89, 131, 178, 183.As'vatari, 346.As'vin, 371.As'viní, 343.As'vins, 28, 36, 60, 62, 163, 246, 339, 343, 403, 490.Atikáya, 468, 478 ff.Atirútra, 24.Atri, 245, 561.Aurva, 373 note.Avantí, 374.

Avindhya, 415.
Ayodhyá, 4, 6, 11, 12, 14, 19, 32, 33, 38, 49, 70, 72, 79, 81, 83, 84, 85, 88, 95, 96, passim.Ayomukh, 374.Ayomukhi, 310.
p. 569
Báhika, 176.
Bahuputra, 245.
Bala, 264.
Bálakhilyas, 63, 235, 270, 271, 374.Bali, 43, 59, 107, 275, 302, 421,Báli, 5, 9, 29, 318, 324, 328, 329. 333 ff.,
344, 356 ff, 362, 364, 366, 367, 379,380, 391, 404, 412, 420, 440, 442, 448,456, 458, 475, 478, 500, 503, 505.
Barbars, 66.
Beauty, 26, 29, 58, 88, 283, 455.Bhadamadrá, 246.

Bhadra, 52.
Bhaga, 124, 243.
Bhagírath, 53, 54, 55, 82, 220, 372.
Bhágírathí, 56.Bharadvája, 4, 7, 9, 10, 158, 159, 193, 196,
197, 199, 200, 201, 501.
Bharat, 4, 9, 10, 32, 81, 83, 84, 88, 89, 94,
97, passim.
Bharatas, 550.
Bhárunda, 178.Bhásí, 246.
Bhásakarna, 420.
Bhava, 78.Bhímá, 198.
Bhogavati, 12 note, 267, 375.

Bhrigu, 40, 63, 73, 81, 85, 86, 88, l33, 220.
Brahmá, 6, 7, 10, 19, 25, 26, 33, 38, 39, 42,
46, 48, 54, 56, 59, 61, 63, 65, 67, 68, 74,75, 77, 8l, passim.
Brahmadatta, 46, 47.
Brahmádikas, 133 note.Bhrahmamálas, 548.Budha, 287.
Buddhist, 219.
C.Cancer, 109.
Ceylon, 375 note.
Chaitra, 91.Chaitraratha, 4l, l78, l99, 267, 279, 315, 493.
Chakraván, 376.

Champá, 30.
Chanda, 448.
Chandra, 464.
Chandála, 69, 70.Chatushtom, 24.Chitrá, 111, 250, 283.
Chitrakúta, 4, 9, 160, 161, 197, 200, 201, 202, 209, 235, 
236, 317, 416, 501.
Chitraratha, 132.Cholas, 549.
Chúlí, 47.
Chyavan, 81, 220.D.Dadhimukh, 426.

Dadhivakra, 364 note.
Daitya, 125, 152, 211, 246, 289, 306, 371,
418.
Daksha, 36, 78, 228, 245, 257, 396.
Dánav, 255, 270, 306, 307, 311, 371, 372,
382, 432, 443, 477.
Dandak, 9, 99, 103, 117, 124, 126, 130, 166,
181, 199, 211, 238, 271, 374.
Dandaká, 5.
Danú, 245, 246, 313.
Dapple skin, 64, 65.Dardar, 110, 198.
Dardur, 448.
D'arimukha, 371.Das'arna, 374.

Dasáratha, 3, 9, 12, 14, 16, 18 ff., 25, 26,
29, 30, 32, 34, 4l, 61, 62, 77, 79, 80 ff., 91,92, 95, passim.
Dasyus, 444.
Devamídha, 82.
Devántak, 479, 480.Devarát, 77, 82, 86.Devasakhá, 378.
Devavati. 515.
Dhanyamáliní, 481.Dhanvantari, 57 note.
Dharmabhrit, 240.
Dharmapál, 14.Dharmárnya, 46.Dharmavardhan, 179.

Dhritaráshtrí, 246.
p. 570
Dhrishtaketu, 82.
Dhrishti, 14, 202.
Dhruvasandhi, 81, 219.
Dhúmra, 371, 448.Dhúmráksha, 433 note, 465, 466.Dhúmrás'va, 60, 481.
Dhundhumár, 81, 171, 219.
Díkshá, 44.Dilípa, 5 note, 53, 54, 56, 82, 171, 190, 220.
Diti, 58, 59, 245, 246, 323.
Dragon, 101.Dridhanetra, 68.

Drishti, 202.
Drona, 464.
Drumakulya, 444.
Dundhubi, 333, 335, 338.Durdhar, 420.Durdharsha, 433 note.
Durmukha, 432, 433 note.
Durjaya, 256 note.Durvásas, 521.
Dúshan, 5, 250, 254, 255, 256, 258, 259, 261,
264, 265, 267-271, 294, 461, 502.
Dwida, 364 note.Dwijihva, 474.Dwivid, 371, 428, 430, 449, 451, 475, 483, 484.

Dwivida, 28.
Dyumatsena, 129.
E.
Ekapádakas, 549.Ekas'ála, 179.F
Fame, 26, 283. 
Fate, 42, 68, 70, 71, 81, 119, 122, 123, 130
181, 182, 195, 256, 293, 296, 309, 343, 349,351, 354, 386, 404, 415, 439, 492.
Fire, 2, 30, 45, 49, 218, 374.
Fortune, 2, 58, 90, 94, 124, 146, 160, 188,
242, 244, 283, 449, 453.
Fire-god, 74, 124, 328.G.Gádhi, 40, 48, 63, 64, 67, 68.

Gaja, 364 note, 371, 429, 449, 459.
Gálava, 518.
Gandhamádan, 28, 159, 381, 429, 446, 476.
Gandharva, 199, 256, 258, 259, 278, 285.
351, 396, 425, 437, 441, 454, 466, 468, 491.
Gandharvas, 267, 270, 281, 283, 306, 307,
308, 318, 364, 370, 375, 377, 388, 394, 409,420, 432, 449, 455, 472.
Gandharví, 246, 265.Gangá, 7, 9, 37, 38, 45, 48, 49, passim.
Garud, 28, 29, 53, 246, 271, 373, 453, 465,
470, 475.
Gautam, 60, 61, 62, 505.Gautama, 236.
Garga, 133.
Gaváksha, 364 note, 429, 449, 468, 475, 476.

Gavaya, 364 note, 371, 429, 448, 468.
Gaya, 482.
Gayá, 216.
Gáyatrí, 243.Ghritáchí, 46, 198, 367.Ghoralohamukhas, 548.
Girivraja, 46, 176.
Glory, 301.Godávarí, 245, 247, 248, 249, 282, 303, 310,
374, 500.
Gokarna, 54.
Golabh, 351.Gomatí, 151, 179, 448, 502, 503.Gop, 199.

Guha, 4, 9, 152-156, 162, 192, 193, 194,
208, 501.
Guhyakas, 378.
H.
Háhá, 198.Haihayas, 81, 219.Hanúmán, 5, 9, 10, 28, 324 ff., 328, 332,
337, 340, 350, 355, 359, 360, 363, 364 note,368, 37l, 374, 378 ff., 392 ff., 411 ff., 324ff. 449, 456.
Hara, 448.
Harí, 246.Hárítas, 66.
Haryas'va, 82.
Hástinapura, 176.Hastiprishthak, 179.

p. 571
Havishyand, 68.
Hayagriva, 346, 376.Hemá, 198, 382.Hemachandra, 60.Heti, 515.Himálaya, 3, 14, 45, 48, 49, 50, 53, 54, 61,   67, 76, 81, 88.Himaváu, 380.
Hiranyakas'ipu, 391 note, 407.
Hiranyanábha, 500.Hládini, 55, 178.Honour, 283.Hotri, 24.Hras'varomá, 82.Huhú, 198.
I.
Ikshumatí, 80, 176.
Ikshváku, 2, 11, 13, 18, 24, 25, 35, 59,   60, 69, 70, 71, 73, 81, 82, 83, 90, 94,   96, 103, 219, 390.Ilval, 241.Indra, 2, 5, 13, 14, 25, 28, 29, 36, 39, 40, 43   ff. 50, 56, passim.

Indrajánu, 371 note.
Indrajit, 420, 432, 436, 437, 441, 455, 459  ff., 482, 485.Indras'atru, 433 note.Indras'ira, 178.Irávati, 246.
J
Jábáli 505.
Jahnu, 55.Jáhnavi, 49, 55, 154.Jamadagui, 85, 86, 87, 119.Jámbaván, 371, 374, 388, 391, 393, 402, 425,   428, 429, 439, 446, 448, 456, 464, 483, 503.Jambudvip, 51, 373.Jambumáli, 418, 419, 420, 459, 460.Jambuprastha, 179.Jámbuvatu, 364 note.Janak, 4, 8, 9, 21, 45, 60, 61, 62, 77--85,   88, 90, passim.Janamejaya, 171.Janasthán, 225, 251, 254, 255, 264, 265,   271, 281, 282, 294, 295, 298, 308, 404,   439, 454, 463, 474, 493, 500.
Játarúpa, 373.
Jatáyu, 5.Jatáyus, 245, 247, 280, 288, 290, 308, 385

   ff., 500, 502.
Java, 231.Jáváli, 20, 80, 174, 217, 218, 219, 222.Jayá, 36.Jayanta, 14, 175.Jumna, 109, 501, 502.Jupiter, 144.Justice, 3, 35, 42, 149, 243, 346, 454.Jyotishtom, 24.
K.
Kabandba, 5, 9, 310--316, 446, 500.
Kadrú, 246.Kadrumá, 246.Kaikasí, 516.Kaikeyí, 3, 4, 9, 27, 32, 88, 96--103, passim.Kailása, 38, 85, 92, 96, 110, 111, 267, 286,   357, 364, 368, 369, 373, 378, 421, 431.Kakustha, 35, 37, 82, 109, 110, 123, 137,   142, 147, 149, 151, 153, 192, 208, 211,   220, 311.Kála, 378.
Kálak, 246.
Kálaká, 245, 246.Kálakámuka, 256 note.Kálamahí, 372.Kalinda, 178.

Kálindí, 81, 160, 220.
Kalinga, 179.Kalingas, 549,Kalmáshapáda 82, 220.Káma 37, 38, 42, 283, 286, 296.Kámboja, 13, 66.
p. 572
Kambojas 66.Kampill, 47Kandu, 118,380, 440.Kandarpa, 37, 74, 75, 76, 250, 269.Kanva, 440.Kanyakubja, 47.Kapil, 51,52,53.Kapivati, 179.Kardam, 245.Karnapravarnnas, 548.Kartakeya, 243.Karttavirya, 518.Kali, 21, 102.Kasikosalas, 548.Kasyap, 15, 10, 20, 30, 57-59. 80, 81,86, 87, 91, 92, 118, 219, 215,passim.Katyayan, 505.Katyayana, 80, 174.Kausnlya, 3, 23, 27, 30,31,79,84,88, 93,94, 97, 98, 100, passim.

Kausambi, 46.
Kauasikas, 549.Kausiki, 48, 372.Kaveri, 375.Kaustubha, 58.Kavya, 40.Kekaya, 2l, 84, 88,90.137,139,174,175.Kerala, 190. Keralas, 549.Kelari, 371.Kesini, 49, 50.Khara, 9, 225, 250ff., 281, 288, 290, 294,295,433,446,451,461 477,493Kinnars, 270, 306, 308, 318, 321, 373, 425.Kimpurushas, 28 note,Kimtas, 66. 549.Kirtirat, 82.Kirtiratha, 82.Kishkindha, 15, 333, 334, 336, 338, 339, 351,357, 362, 369, 385, 449, 464, 500.Kosal, 11, 102, 273 307, 359, 418Kosala, 151,173.Krathan, 448.Kratu, 245.Krauncba, 310, 378, 476.Kraunchi, 246.Krisasva, 36, 41, 43.Krishna, 497Krishnagiri, 448.

Krishnveui, 374.
Krita, 57, 395.Krodhavasa, 245, 246.Kshatriyas, 246, 346.Kukshi, 8l,2l9.Kulinga, 176.Kumbha, 484.Kumbhakaraa, 10, 250, 399, 4l1, 435 ff.,441, 470 ff..Kumuda, 364 note, 448,Kunjar, 375, 392.Kuru(s), North, 198, 203, 315, ???. *Kurujangal, 176.Kusa, 10, 46, 48, 63, 526.Kusadhwaj, 80, 82, 88.Kusamba, 46.Kusuva, 60.Eusnfibha. 46, 47, 48, 63.Euaik, 33, 35, 36, 38, 44, 56,70 ff., 83.Entika, 179.Kutikoshtika, 179.Kuvera, 23, 88, 109,110, 111, 112, I98,190, 204, 232, 267, 378, 422, 431, 432483.
L.
Lakshman, 4, 8,11, 32, 36, 38, 40, 41,44,

45, 56, 61, 79, 80, 82-84, 88, 91, 94, 97,
98, pasiim.Lakshmi, 88, ll6, l46, 227, 400, 453,462, 497.Lamba, 397.Lanka, 5, 10, 265, 267, 284, 286, 293, 295--297,367, 387, 397, 411, 423ff., 439, 456ff.Lankatankata, 515.Lava, 10, 526.Lohitya, 179.Lokapalas, 485.Lomapad, 15,16,18,19, 21, 30.
p. 573
M.
Mádhaví, 520.
Madhu, *46, 51, 57, 87, 95.Madhúk*, 245.Madhushyand* 68, 74.Madrak* , 550.Maghá, *Magad*, *6,102.Mágaui* , 548.Mahábír, *32.Mahabál*, 433 note.Mahábhárat, 520, 524, 551, 554.Mahádev*, 61, 515.Mahándb*ak, 82.

Mahápadma, 14, 52.
Mahákapála, 256 note, 260.Mahámál*. 256 note.Mahápárá*va, 433, 436, 455, 478, 480, 487.Mahárat*, 68.Maháron*á, 82.Maháru*, 368.Mahás'a*, 368.Mahend*, 28, 59, 86, 87, 88, 140, 167,   2**, 243, 244, 307, 336, 344, 364, 368,   370, 3**, 490, 531, 554.Mahes'wai*, 369, 498.Mahi, 372.Máhishmatí, 518.Mahishikas, 549.Mahodar, 433 note, 450, 455, 474, 478 ff.Mahodaya, 46, 70, 71, 488.Maináka, 10, 394, 500 note.Mainda, 28, 364 note, 371, 428, 430, 439,   449, 451, 458, 482, 483.Makaráksha, 485 note.Malaya, 198, 324, 328, 375, 379, 430.Malaja, 39.Málí, 515, 516.Máliní, 175, 539.Mályavan, 454, 455.Málavas*, 548.Mályavat, 515, 516.Mánas, 38.

Mandakarni, 240.
Mandákiní, 200, 201, 203, 209, 234, 235,   304, 322, 416 note.Mandalí, 556.Mandar, 57, l63, 285, 362, 368, 372, 399,   402, 421, 485, 491, 493, 525.Mandarí, 444.Mándhátá, 8l, 219, 347, 518.Mándaví, 84.Mándavya, 226 note.Mandehas, 373.Mandodarí, 402, 492, 500, 5l6.Mandra, 14.Manibhadra, 441.Manthará, 40, 96, 97, 99, 187.Manu, 11, 12, 13, 81, 103, 151, 179, 219, 245,   246, 347, 490, 505, 537, 555.Maricha, 58.Márícha, 5, 9, 35, 39, 40, 44, 266, 271--280, 298.Maríchi, 81, 91, 219, 245.Marichi*pas, 270, 271.Márkandeya, 80, 174.Mars, 93, 144, 339, 404, 445, 467, 489.Maru, 82, 220.Maruts, 25, 54, *159, 403, 517, 547, 555.Máshas, 270, 271.Mátali, 109, 142, 489, 491 493.Matanga, 14, 246, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319,   336, 337, 380.

Mátangí, 246.
Mátaris'vá, 389.Matsya, 102, 523, 537, 549.Maya, 293, 382, 432, 488.Máyá, 293, 521.Máyáví, 333, 334, 379.Meghamálí, 256 note.Meghanáda, 10.Mekhal, 374.Mená, 49, 394 note.Menaká, 74.Mercury, 144, 339, 467.Meru, 4, 49, 92, 109, 110, 142, 182, 232, 236,   254, 291, 315, 368, 370, 377, 380, 418, 493.Merus'avarni, 382.Mina, 32.Mis'rakes'í, 199.Mithi, 82.Mithilá, 9 note, 21, 45, 60, 61, 78, 81, 83,   84, 85.Mitragh*na, 459.
p. 574
Mlechchhas, 66, 537, 550.Modesty, 26.Moon, 30, 42, 58, 109 ff., 124, 218, 227, 243,   276, 367, 413, 414, 488.Mriga, 14.

Mrigamandá, 246.
Mrigí, 246.Mudgalya, 174.
N.
Nábhág, 82, 220. 
Nágadantá, 198.Nágas, 12, 55, 66, 68, 145, 270, 273, 395, 409,   413, 420, 427, 518.Nahush, 82, 95, 171, 190, 220, 307. Nairrit, 430. Nala, 10, 340, 364 note, 428, 444, 445, 448,   449, 468, 475, 483. Nalá, 246. Naliní, 55, 203, 204, 267, 436. Namuchi, 39, 261, 264, 275, 336. Nandá, 415. Nandan, 26, 175, 200, 267, 279, 315, 316, 426. Nandi, 249, 421. Nandigráma, 4 ,6, 9, 224, 502, 503.Nandís'vara, 471.Nandivardhan, 82.Nárad, 1, 2, 8, 9, 124, 199, 543.Narak, 479.Narántak, 479.Náráyan, 25, 26, 95, 393, 474, 497, 516, 517,   522, 535, 559.Narmadá, 374, 448, 518.

Nikumbha, 432, 433 note, 437, 459, 484.
Níla, 28, 340, 352, 360, 364 note, 371, 374,   428, 429, 430, 446, 448, 449, 456, 458, 459,   469, 472, 475, 482.Nimi, 77, 82.Nis'ákar, 389, 390.Nishádas, 4,152,192,196, 271, 501, 537.
O
Ocean, 10, 95, 144, 285, 286, 336, 346, 387.
Oshthakarnakas, 548.
PPahlavas, 66.
Páka, 252, 297, 498.Pampá, 5, 9, 235, 293, 314--321, 327.Panas, 371, 428, 448, 464.Panasa, 455 note.Panchajan, 376.Panchála, 176, 539.Panchápsaras, 240.Panchavata, 9.Panchavatí, 244, 245, 247.Pándyas, 375, 549.Parás'ara, 517.Paras'uráma, 119 note, 523, 531.Paraviráksha, 256 note.

Páriyátra, 376, 448.
Parjanya, 112, 174, 261, 448.Párvatí, 249 note, 515, 542.Paulastya, 472.Paulomí, 29, 370.Pávaní, 55.Phálguní, 83.Pináka, 67.Pitris, 550.Prabháva, 363.Prachetas, 1, 245.Praghas, 420, 459, 460.Prágvat, 179.Prahasta, 399, 418, 419, 421, 422, 432 ff.,   441, 451, 452, 455, 456, 471, 481.Praheti, 515.Prahláda, 391.Prajangha, 459, 460.Pralamba, 175.Pramátha, 256 note.Pramathí, 260, 448.Pramati, 455 note.*Prajápati, 133 note, 554, 560.Prasenajit, 81, 219.Pras'ravan, 304, 357, 380, 383, 415, 426.Pras'us'ruka, 82, 220.Prasthalas, 550.Pratindhak, 82.Pravargya, 22.

Prayág, 158, 159, 196.
p. 575
Prithu, 81, 219.
Prithus'yáma, 256 note.Proshthapadá, 32.Pulah, 245.Pulastya, 35, 245, 254, 268, 288, 408, 515.Pulindas, 550.Puloma, 370.Punarvasu, 93.Pundaríká, 199.Pundras, 548, 549.Puranda, 522.Purandara, 384, 522.Punjikasthalá, 436, 552.Purúravas, 286, 544, 545.Purusha, 256 note, 559.Purushádak, 82, 220.Purushottam, 498, 517.Púshán, 124.Pushpak, 10, 80, 286, 499, 519.Pushya, 32, 90, 92, 94, 96, 98, 109, 126.
RRabhasa, 433 note.
Raghu, 5, 9, 22, 32 ff., 50, 56, 61, passim.

Raghunandana, 522.
Rághava, 5 note.Ráhu, 93, 223, 261, 272, 303, 351, 480.Rain, Lord of, 92, 222.Rájagriha, 174, 175.Ráma, passim.Rámáyana, 8 note, 10, 11, 541, 542.Rambhá, 75, 232, 448.Ramaná, 199.Ras'miketu, 433 note, 459.Rávan, 5, 9, 10, 25, 26, 32, 35, passim.Renuká, 63, 119.Richíka, 48, 73, 86.Right, 42, 68.Riksharajas, 386, 442.Rikshaván, 448.Rishabh, 373, 375, 429, 446, 476, 483.Rishtikas, 549.Rishyamúka, 9, 314, 315, 316, 318 ff., 332,   335, 339, 340, 353, 380, 500.Rishyas'ring, 15--24, 29, 30.Rohiní, 4, 112, 223, 227, 246, 251, 282, 287,   367, 404, 413, 445.Rohitas, 376, 558.Rudhirás'ana, 256 note.Rudra, 49, 57, 67, 77, 78, 162, 249, 257, 264,   283, 296, 378, 413, 483.Rudras, 246, 558.Rukminí, 517.

Rumá, 346, 349, 350, 363, 366, 367, 371,
   385, 403.Ruman, 371.
S
Sachí, 29, 202, 234, 238, 276, 286, 297, 370,
   408, 415, 494, 519, 522.Sádhyas, 490, 555, 558, 559.Sagar, 11, 50 ff., 82, 119, 137, 171, 441.Sahadeva, 60.Sahya, 429, 430.S'aivya, 104, 107, 171, 533.S'akas, 66, 550.S'akra, 75, 234, 307, 313, 336, 344, 448, 464.S'álmalí, 176, 539.S'ályakartan, 178.S'áman, 186, 326, 359.S'ambar, 479.S'ambara, 99, 100*.Sampátí, 5, 9, 246, 364 note, 385, 387 ff.,   412, 455 note, 459, 460, 464.Samprakshálas, 235.Sandhyá, 515.Sanatkumár, 15, 16.Sanháras, 36.Sanhráda, 474.S'anis'char, 283.S'ankan, 82.

S'ankar, 57, 335.
S'ankás'ya, 80, 81, 82, 83.S'ankha, 555.S'ankhan, 220, 432.Sanrochan, 448.S'ans'ray, 245.S'ántá, 16, 19, 29, 30, 31.S'arabh, 364 note, 439, 476.S'arabhanga, 9, 233, 234, 235, 236, 265, 502.Sarandib, 375 note.Saradandá, 176, 539.S'árdúla, 441, 449, 450.S'árdúlí, 246.
p. 576
Sarjú, 11, 20, 22, 36, 37, 38, 50, passim.Saramá, 452, 453.Sáran, 446, 447, 455.Sáranga, 556.Sarasvatí, 178, 372, 516, 522.Sárvabhauma, 429.Sarvartírtha, 179.S'as'ivindhus, 81, 219.S'atabali, 371, 377, 379, 380.Satadrú, 178, 539.S'atahradá, 231.S'atánanda, 62, 63, 77, 79, 80, 81, 84.S'atrughna, 32, 83, 84, 88, 89, 97, passim.

S'atrunjay, 504.
Satyaván, 129.Satyavatí, 48.Sávitrí, 129, 227.S'avarí, 315, 316, 317.Saumanas, 373.Sávarní, 377.Seven Rishis, 23.S'esha, 245.Siddhárth, 14, 137, 138, 175.Siddhas, 28 note, 540, 559.S'íghraga, 82, 220.S'ilá, 178.S'ílávahá, 178.Sindhu, 13, 21, 55, 102, 372, 376, 443.Sinhiká, 10, 396.S'is'ir(a), 372, 555.Sítá, 4 ff., 55, 78, 79, 83, 84, 88, 93, passim.S'iva, 4, 36, 42, 54, 55, 57, 67, 78, 82, 85, 86,   109, 110, 205, 523, 524, 543, 554.Skanda, 554.Soma, 52, 58, 198, 267, 378, 554.Somadatta, 60.Somadá, 47.Somagirí, 376, 378.S'ona, 45, 48, 372.S'ringavera, 4, 192, 196, 223, 501, 502.Srinjay, 60.S'rutakírti, 84.

Sthánu, 25, 37, 245.
Sthánumetí, 179.Sthúláksha, 256 note, 260.Sthúlas'iras, 313.Subáhu, 364 note.Suchakshu, 55.Suchandra, 60.S'uchi, 238.Sudámá, 178.Sudáman, 81, 176.Sudars'an, 82, 83, 220, 373, 378, 448.Sudars'andwíp, 374.Sudhanvá, 82.Sudhriti, 82.S'údras, 6, 13, 246.Sugríva, 5, 6, 9, 28, 29, 314, 316, 318, 324 ff.,   337, 339, 344, 346 ff., 371, 375 ff.., 412, 414,   422, 424, 430, 439 ff., 446, 450, 519, 545.Súka, 442, 446, 447, 455 ff.Sukes'a, 515, 516.Suketu, 39, 82.Sukí, 246.S'ukra. 124, 210, 279, 384, 429.Sumáli, 515, 516.Sumágadhí, 46.Sumantra, 15, 16, 19, 21, 80, 92, passim.Sumati, 49, 50, 59, 60.Sumitrá, 27, 30, 32, 88, 94, passim.Sun, 93, 109, 110, 124, 243.

Sunábha, 425.
Sunahs'epha, 72, 73, 74Sunda, 35, 39.Sunetra, 364 note.Suparna, 53, 125, 231, 343, 349, 388.Supárs'va, 388.Supátala, 364 note.Suptaghna, 433 note.Surá, 58.Surabhí, 183, 246.Surapati, 522.Suras, 58.Surasá, 246, 395.Suráshtra, 21, 102, 376.Súrasenas, 550.Súrpanakhá, 5, 9, 249 ff., 267 ff., 288, 50*Súrya, 555.Súryáksha, 364 note.Súryas'atru, 433 note.Súryaván, 375.Susandhi, 81, 219.Sushen, 28, 351, 364 note, 376, 379, 38*   429, 464, 468, 488.Sutanu, 199.Sutíkshna, 9, 234, 236, 237, 240, 241.
p. 577
Suváhu, 35, 44, 45, 146.

Suvarat, 220.
Suvela, 450, 456, 457.Suvíra, 21, 102.Suyajn'a, 20, 132.Svayambhu, 394.Svayamprabhá, 382.S'vetá, 246.S'vetáranya, 264.Swarga, 54, 101, 202, 493.Swarnaromá, 82.S'weta, 448.S'yáma, 160.Syandíká, 151.S'yenagámí, 256 note, 260.S'yeni, 246.
T.
Tádaká, 38, 39, 40, 41.
Tádakeya, 266.Taittiríya, 132.Takshak, 432.Takshaka, 267.Tálajanghas, 81, 219.Tamasá, 7, 147, 148, 149.Támrá, 245, 246.Támraparní, 375.Tapan, 459, 555.Tára, 364 note, 379 ff.

Tárá, 9, 336, 34* ff., 355, 359, 362, 363, 366,
   367, 369, 371, 385, 403, 449, 546.Tárak, 430.Tárk*hya, 214.Ten-necked, 250.Thirty-three Gods, 51.Thousand-eyed, 41, 59, 60, 74, 75, 76, 86,   90, 112, 252, 297, 504.Three-eyed God, 86.Thunderer, 234.Titan, 58, 67, 72, 79, 109, 114, 124.Tor*n, 179.Town-Destroyer, 59, 60.Trident, 68.Trident-wielding, 54, 57.Trijat, 133.Trijatá, 410, 463.Trikúta, 456, 457, 500, 515.Trinavindu, 515.Trípathagá, 56.Tripur, 306.Tripura, 85, 86.Tris'anku, 68--72, 81, 144, 219, 429.Tris'irá, 9.Tris'iras, 256 note, 260, 261, 264, 267, 271,   478, 479, 480, 502.Tumburu, 198, 199, 232.
U.

Uchchaihs'ravas, 58, 522.
Udayagiri, 379 note.Udávasu, 82.Ukthya, 24.Ujjiháná, 179.Umá, 49, 54, 205, 249 note, 471, 542, 543.Upasad, 22.Upasunda, 35.Upendra, 74, 559.Urmilá, 47, 83, 84, 88, 228.Urvas'í, 286, 544, 545.Us'anas, 382.Utkal, 374.Uttániká, 179, 539.
V.
Váhli, 13.
Váhlika, 376.Vahni, 555.Vaijayanta, 99, 179, 522.Vaidyut, 375.Vaikhánasas, 270, 271, 374.Vainateya, 388.Vais'yas, 246.Vais'ravan. 265, 285, 378, 414, 515.Vaitaraní, 293.Vajra, 376.

Vajradanshtra, 432, 433 note, 466, 467.
Válmiki, 1, 7--11, 161, 512, 542.Vámadeva, 14, 79, 80, 91, 174, 222, 505.Váma*a, 14, 523.Vána, 81, 219.Vanáyu, 13.Vangas, 102.
p. 578
Varadas, 550.Varun, 1 note, 28, 42, 67, 88, 109, 124, 228,   243, 272, 293, 338, 377, 383, 448, 471, 518.Varútha. 179.Varás'ya, 256 note.Vásav, 92.Vásava, 236, 522.Vásishtha, 14, 15, 19--22, 25, 32, passim.Vásudeva, 5l, 52.Vásuakí, 57, 267, 375, 432, 518, 522.Vasus, 14, 46, 246, 283, 377, 403, 522, 554.Vasvaukasárá, 203.Vátápi, 241, 280.Váyu, 59, 243, 369, 427, 428, 555.Vedas, 1 note, 3, 12, 22, 70, 89, 109, 125,   147, 184, 229, 559.Vedas'rutí, 151.Vedavatí, 470, 517.Vegadaráí, 429, 446, 483.

Vená, 448, 537.
Vibhándak, l5, l6, 17, 18, 25.Vibhíshan, 6, 10, 250, 273, 415, 422, 423,   433 ff., 449 ff., 472, 483, 487 ff., 516.Vibudh, 82.Vidarbha, 46, 49.Vidarbhas, 549.Videha, 79 ff., 129, 130, 142, 166, 195, 227.Videhas, 548.Videhan, 9, 79, 95, 104, 119, 125, passim.Vidyádharí, 203 note.Vidyujjihva, 450.Vidyuumáli, 364 note.Vidyutkes'a, 515.Vihangama, 256 note.Vijay, l4, 36, l75, 505.Vikatá, 409.Vikrit, 245.Vikukshi, 8l, 219.Vinata, 179, 379, 380, 388, 448.Vinatá, 53, 125, 246.Vindhya, 14, 51, 242, 364, 370, 374, 380.Vindu, 55.Vipás'á, 176, 539.Vírabáhu, 364 note.Virádha, 5, 9, 229, 232, 404, 446, 502.Viráj, 124.Víramatsya, 178.Virochan, 40, 43.

Virtue, 223, 272.
Virúpáksha, 52, 420, 433, 459, 460, 487.Vis'álá, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62.Visákhás, l44, 430.Vishnu, 1 note, 2, 3, 25, 32, 40, passim.Vis'ravas, 35, 309, 408, 515, 516.Vis'váchi, 198.Vis'vakarmá, 28, 42, 198, 376, 387, 444, 445,   448, 499, 500, 515, 556.Vis'vámitra, 9, 32 ff., 39, 41, 44, 45, passim.Vis'vávasu, 198.Vis'vedevas, 162.Vis'vajit, 24.Vis'varúpa, 353.Vis'vas, 377.Vitardan, 474.Vivasvat, 81, 171, 219, 245, 386, 532.Vrana, 444.Vrihadratha, 82.Vrihaspati, 28, 3l, 95, 124, 210, 307, 464, 517.Vritra, 125, 264, 288, 387, 487, 491, 536.Vulture-king, 9.
W.
War-god, l24, 476.
Wind, 30, 218.Wind-god, 10, 36, 42, 68, 325, 326, 379, 392   ff., 4l7 ff., 449, 470, 478, 48l, 488, 502, 503.

Y.
Yajnakopa, 433 note, 459.
Yajush, 326.Yajnasatru, 256 note.Yaksha, 236 note, 306, 318, 363, 375, 394,   420, 422, 425, 431, 454, 458, 468.Yama, 68, 71, 112, 117, 124, 140, 166, 171,   241, 248, 262, 275, 287, 313, 343 ff., 432,   437, 449, 472, 475, 496, 518, 554.Yamuná, 158, 159, 160, 178, 214, 223, 372.Yámun, 372.Yavanas, 66, 550.Yavadwípa, 372.Yayáti, 82, 95, 107, 119, 163, 186, 307, 344.Yudhájit, 84, 88, 180, 190.Yúpáksha, 420, 472.Yuvanás'va, 81, 219.
p. 579

